It’s Time to Reimagine Scale
by Nathan Furr, Susannah Harmon Furr and John Kay
November 22, 2024

Summary.   It’s conventional wisdom in business that bigger is better, and that being able to scale is an essential element of a company’s success. But there is a flaw at the heart of the concept of scaling, though it can be hard to articulate. Many of our ideas about scaling rest on foundational economic ideas eloquently espoused by Adam Smith in The Wealth of Nations. The canonical text opens with a description of a pin factory in France to demonstrate the benefits of scaling. Looking at this story from a modern vantage shows important points that Smith — and the generations raised on his ideas — may have missed: that modern work thrives on boundary-crossing and integrative thinking, which create benefits far beyond those ascribed to simple conceptualizations of division of labor and specialization; that there are tradeoffs involved when we mechanize people through specialization; and that there may be other, better metrics to measure success. In light of this, it’s worth also considering other kind of scale: scaling a model, scaling impact, and scaling humanity, rather than growing individual companies.
For some time, scale and scaling — meaning that a business grows to ever-greater size — have been the holy grail of the startup and corporate world. Implicitly many believe that if something doesn’t scale, then it’s a failure. Bigger means better, and not-bigger means failure. For example, we know one entrepreneur who created a popular social network, but because it did not scale to become one of the major social networks, for some time he saw his business as a failure even though it throws off millions in revenue and brings together communities who all enjoy the same game. Likewise, we have written about the experimentation process that led to Rent the Runway, but because this business has inherent limits to scale tied to renting physical assets, some have pushed back on the example because “it didn’t really scale.”
While we all understand the motivation for these questions, somehow, these critiques also feel slightly misplaced. But can we say it out loud? Can we say why getting bigger does not always equal success? Others have done so, including famed economist E.F. Schumacher in his book, Small Is Beautiful. There is a flaw at the heart of the concept of scaling, though it can be hard to articulate in the face of “bigger is better.” Looking back to the roots of “scale” can help us pinpoint what conventional wisdom might be missing.
How We Think About Scale
Many of our ideas about scaling rest on foundational economic ideas eloquently espoused by Adam Smith in The Wealth of Nations, such as the division of labor and specialization. Smith opens this canonical text with a description of a pin factory in France, where he argues that the division of labor has enabled unprecedented efficiency and increased production with scale. In Smith’s example, one worker pulls a wire to create the body of the pin, another worker hammers out the head, and so forth, using division of labor to produce many times more pins than one worker could produce alone. The benefits of the approach are self-evident in the example, and the bigger the factory the better.
But there is a twist to the story — and thus to the foundational economic thinking it makes up — that has important implications: Adam Smith never actually visited the pin factory on which he builds his argument. In fact, Smith only saw an illustration in Denis Diderot’s Encyclopedie. But Diderot also never visited the factory. The essay in Encyclopedie was written by M. Delaire, a philosopher who also did not visit the factory, but rather wrote the article based on an illustration! In essence, one of our most foundational economic principles is based on fourth-hand knowledge, at best.
Given this fact, it’s hard not to wonder whether Adam Smith might have missed something. To find out, my coauthor Susannah Furr, Oxford economist Sir John Kay, and I decided to visit the last pin factory that exists in France — several centuries later, with about the same number of employees as the one about which Smith ambiguously claimed “I have seen a small manufactory of this kind where ten men only were employed.”
Rethinking Scale
The ancient building sits at a low point between two hills, where the river could turn early manufacturing machines, which were later powered by electricity and then themselves replaced by machines with ever-greater automation. Today there are a few workers in the factory, most of them skilled workers maintaining the machinery or performing the many tasks that machines cannot do. What struck us most when looking at the factory is what Smith — and those of us raised on his doctrines and the endless benefits of scale — are the lessons we may have missed about the division of labor.
First, modern work thrives on boundary-crossing and integrative thinking that create benefits far beyond those ascribed to simple conceptualizations of division of labor and specialization. In other words, the machines that populate the factory today were developed to manufacture pins but draw on knowledge from diverse areas, including mechanical engineering, manufacturing operations, heat dynamics, vacuum handling, and dozens of other domains, all of which had to be recombined to create the modern pin factory. Moreover, the most valuable workers in the factory today have broad knowledge of electronics, automation, materials, and other knowledge areas to maintain the machines. Work that is segmented and specialized like that described in the pin factory has been or will be automated by machines or AI. Work that is robust against replacement by automation like AI is differentiated, cross-functional, and integrative.
Second, because Smith never visited the factory, he never thought through the tradeoffs involved when we mechanize people through specialization. Smith’s contemporary, Adam Ferguson, did worry about what happens when we down-skill people and treat them like machines. In his essay, “The History of Civil Society,” he wrote about the downsides: “many parts in the practice of every art, and in the detail of every department, require no abilities, or actually tend to contract and to limit the views of the mind.” Not only do these people lose the very thing that differentiates them from machines — creativity, integrative thinking, etc. — but they make themselves more vulnerable to replacement, and more dissatisfied. In the opening of Studs Terkel’s respected ethnography Working, Terkel states, “This book, being about work, is, by its very nature, about violence — to the spirit as well as to the body.” I had a flashback to a recent taxi ride in San Francisco. As we passed a Waymo self-driving taxi, the driver mumbled, “Well, there’s my replacement.” What happens when a generation of people who have down-skilled to become drivers are replaced?
Third, although scale undoubtedly produces benefits in some circumstances, when do we need to look beyond scale to other metrics of success? Critics of scaling have pointed out that exaggerated returns to scale are often used to bulldoze other valuable outcomes like well-being. As Sir John has pointed out elsewhere about Adam Smith, “There is little evidence that bigger plants produced marked increases in productivity. [Smith’s claims] would not be the last time in which the human diseconomies of scale offset the exaggerated technical economies of scale.”
What are these human diseconomies? As an example, scaling farming has proven efficient, but an increasing number of voices — including those in big agriculture — are warning that it is devastating our long-term health and the future of the planet. Today you need to eat between eight and 21 oranges to get the nutrients your grandparents received in a single orange because soil has been stripped by fertilizer, pesticide, and monocrops of the microbiological community that creates flavor and nutrition. Anyone who has tasted mass-produced strawberries and tomatoes knows firsthand that they often taste like bags of water compared to their more delicate, flavorful cousins raised in good soil. In the pursuit of scale, we have created efficient food that can be shipped long distances but is not delicious. How can we bring these measures into the conversation — not just in food, but across all of business?
Alternatives to Scaling
We recently worked with Blue Hill at Stone Barns, one of the world’s top restaurants, to understand how they are trying to rearchitect the food industry to support life and nutrition in the long run. Their biggest challenge in getting attention in the business world for an approach as audacious as Space X or Tesla? Critics who immediately dismiss it with the question, “Does it scale?” Ironically, one of the challenges Blue Hill faces is to reinvent the food industry to be smaller, rather than bigger. In an ecological community, a system that integrates multiple types of crops, animals, and systems works better with nature and provides more nutrients and long-term viability. So what are the alternatives to our traditional view of scaling? Here is what leaders may want to consider as they think about their reasons for taking a given path.
Scaling a Model, Not a Company
As we have helped Blue Hill wrestle with how to address themselves to a business community that struggles to understand alternatives to one company getting bigger, we’ve asked: Can a “model” scale rather than a single company? In other words, if one develops an idea, or a business model, that influences and changes the world for the better, could that not be as good, or sometimes even better, than a single company scaling to do so? For example, the team at Blue Hill wants to spread new economic models for small farms that are ecologically sound, and are doing this by developing new sources of economic value for small farmers, such as new cuts of steak that increase the value of grass-fed cows, new products like their grain sausage that stretches the use of the animal increasing its value, new processes such as finishing retired dairy cows for use as high-value beef rather than for low-value ground beef, and encouraging the consumption of soil supporting rotational grains like buckwheat.
As they do so, they are not only scaling a model by sharing and dispersing their knowledge — they are laying the foundations of communities that work. Small farms are not only ecologically sound, they also create stronger communities and greater well-being. To date, Blue Hill is finding increasing success — for example, with the spread of a new generation of vegetables bred for flavor that support small farms, encourage crop rotation, and incentivize healthier eating, now being sold at Whole Foods. In this sense, Blue Hill thinks about an idea spreading, rather than scaling in the traditional sense.
Scaling Impact, Rather than a Company
Likewise, we visited the factory of Huit Denim revitalized by entrepreneur David Hieatt. After a successful career in advertising and creating clothing brands, Hieatt moved to the west coast of Wales, which he discovered had once been the jeans manufacturing headquarters of the UK. However, the industry had collapsed as work fled overseas to low-cost locations. Hieatt launched the Do Lectures, an inspirational conference for entrepreneurs, and then Huit Denim, producing high-quality “jeans for life” in a bid to bring employment back to the region.
As their success has grown, many have pushed Hieatt to expand into other product lines. But at a recent conference for “Makers and Mavericks,” Hieatt challenged the assembled group: Can a company scale in other ways than size? For example, in impact? Since this time, Huit Denim has become an advocate for treating employees well, dealing with microplastics, and manufacturing sustainably.
Scaling Humanity, Instead of Scaling Companies
Although leaders often feel pressure to grow, is that always the right path for its employees, and their communities? Some time ago, the famous evolutionary biologist Stewart Kauffman attended a major conference for strategy scholars. He challenged the assembled crowd: “When will you start asking how GDP can serve humanity rather than humanity serving GDP?”
Kauffman’s question haunts us to this day, because he touched on the other dimensions that could be considered in our definitions of scale. What is best for our happiness, for our community, for ecology? What could that world look like? What would it look like if we got it right? As economist R. H. Tawney once wrote, “The existing economic order and too many of the projects advanced for reconstructing it break down through their neglect of the truism that, since even quite common men have souls, no increase in material wealth will compensate them for arrangements which insult their self-respect and impair their freedom.”
. . .
If we could broaden the lens of what we consider success and scale, we might be able to create more space for a healthier, happier economy. Sometimes we think that because something happens on its own — Adam Smith’s famous invisible hand — that makes it good. But cancer gets bigger on its own. There are places where scale makes sense, but places where it does not. Perhaps one day we could celebrate a company like Huit Denim changing the conversation or an organization like Blue Hill at Stone Barns scaling a model that creates healthier farms and more delicious food as an equal, maybe even bigger, success than a tech company.
