
The Strengths and Weaknesses that Set Founders Apart

by Samantha Hellauer, Sanja Kos, Julie Vermoote and BJ Wright

October 21, 2024

With his recent essay on “Founder Mode,” Paul Graham, the co-founder of Y Combinator, has ignited a conversation on the differences between founder-led companies and those led by professional managers.

“In effect there are two different ways to run a company: founder mode and manager mode,” Graham wrote. “Till now most people even in Silicon Valley have implicitly assumed that scaling a startup meant switching to manager mode. But we can infer the existence of another mode from the dismay of founders who’ve tried it, and the success of their attempts to escape from it.” He continued:

There are as far as I know no books specifically about founder mode. Business schools don’t know it exists. All we have so far are the experiments of individual founders who’ve been figuring it out for themselves. But now that we know what we’re looking for, we can search for it. I hope in a few years founder mode will be as well understood as manager mode. We can already guess at some of the ways it will differ.

It’s clear that founders are not your typical executives. They’re the alchemists of the business world who turn a spark of an idea into a living, breathing business. But the same entrepreneurial instinct that breeds success can make them less straightforward partners, especially when professional investors enter the picture to scale the business to the next level.

The desire to understand what makes founders tick — and how to harness their special sauce to outperform — is one we’ve heard over and over from investors and board members in recent years.

To deepen our own insights and advise clients, we embarked on a comprehensive study of what we call the “founder DNA.” We analyzed more than 1,400 data points from deep assessments of 50 successful founder CEOs and 58 non-founder CEOs in private equity–backed companies. We also conducted qualitative interviews with dozens of founders, investors, CEO successors, and portfolio talent leaders.

Our research revealed that while no founder CEO is the same, they do exhibit distinctive characteristics as a collective. Founder CEOs are “spikier” than their professional counterparts. Their strengths are more pronounced, but so are their weaknesses. For example, founders often possess extraordinary creativity, vision, and persistence. These traits are not just slightly better than average — they can be exceptional.

On the flip side, their weaknesses are often just as extreme. For instance, their hiring mistakes might be more than just occasional missteps, veering into systemic issues that permeate the organization.

A Founder’s Psychological Blueprint

Our analysis revealed three key areas where successful founders diverge from typical executives:

Cognitive Patterns: Founders think in more divergent, non-linear ways. This fuels their creativity but can also lead to challenges in systematic planning.
Motivational Drivers: Founders’ sense of purpose and persistence are deeply ingrained (often stemming from childhood), driving them to push boundaries that others consider impossible.
Relational Styles: Founders tend to remain closely connected with their trusted inner circles, showing more skepticism toward outsiders, which can inspire fierce loyalty while simultaneously leading to difficulties in professional detachment.

Founder CEOs and non-founder CEOs also showed differences in skill development. The performance of founder CEOs is often tied to innate traits — deep-seated characteristics, such as resilience and self-reliance, that are hard to teach or change — or what we might call their “psychological DNA.” Non-founder CEOs’ success often comes from learned behaviors, acquired skills, and patterns recognized over their career.

Founder CEO Superpowers

The passion, creativity, and deep expertise at the core of a founder’s spark drive innovation in ways that professional managers often cannot replicate. While no two founders are the same, our research identified five statistically significant strengths that distinguish founder CEOs from their non-founder counterparts.

1. They are often creative, innovative thinkers who can articulate a compelling vision.

This quality, found among 36% of founder CEOs in our dataset, is perhaps the most powerful. Founders stand out as particularly strong innovators, seeing possibilities where others see roadblocks. “There’s a difference between an artist and a critic…the founder is the artist who knows how to build from scratch,” explained Peter Bauer, co-founder and former CEO of Mimecast. “They’re not just thinking outside the box; they’re creating entirely new boxes.”

In contrast, our research found that a quarter of non-founder CEOs faced challenges originating new ideas, relying more on execution and past experiences.

2. Most founders embody the company’s culture, fostering a deep sense of duty and followership.

The founder’s vision beats at the heart of any successful founder-led company. Eighty-six percent of founders we studied possessed an ability to inspire through passion, charisma, and loyalty. They can coalesce a diverse group of individuals behind a shared goal, or as Daniel Brenhouse, partner at Permira, articulated, “Founders can carry the entire organization on their shoulders in a unique way.”

Conversely, more than two-thirds of non-founder CEOs struggled to gain broader followership, often due to overextending their teams, pushing too hard too fast.

3. Many lead with “customer obsession.”

Three-quarters of the founder CEOs studied demonstrated a strong aptitude for understanding and building products around their customers, especially given their deep domain and industry expertise. One investor noted, “Founder CEOs have an innate ability to find product-market fit, even in uncharted territories. They have a strong sense of the product and know what the customer wants.”

In contrast, 90% of non-founder CEOs relied on a generalist GM playbook. Deep specialization appeared as a gap for more than a third of them.

4. They live and breathe the business, bringing drive and resilience.

Seventy-six percent of founder CEOs in our dataset exhibited a level of drive and resilience that goes beyond simply working hard. One board member shared, “The benefit of founders is that they are entrepreneurial — they care deeply. They act like owners and work super hard. That’s what they’ve had to do to succeed.”

For non-founder CEOs, their hard-charging desire to deliver, a strength shared among 60% of those in the dataset, stemmed from a history of consistently demonstrating credibility through action-oriented execution.

5. They show raw horsepower and agility, learning through trial and error.

More than half of the founder CEOs in our dataset showcased an exceptional ability to pivot their companies and products as the context shifted, constantly adapting by problem-solving or innovating concepts, technologies, and practices. This ability to pivot the company and product is hard to teach and often propels its growth engine.

Non-founder CEOs, on the other hand, demonstrated less adaptability amidst ambiguity, with 47% overly relying on past playbooks.

Founder CEO Blind Spots

Founders aren’t just running a company — they’re emotionally invested in every decision, every product, and every person. This passion is both their greatest asset and a potential Achilles’ heel, especially when confronted with a new set of expectations from board members or investors. Our research also found five statistically significant weaknesses that distinguish founder CEOs.

1. Many seek high levels of autonomy and control, showing sensitivity to criticism and finding it hard to delegate.

Given that founder CEOs often view the business as an extension of themselves, it can be challenging to release the reins. Many founders in our dataset struggled to delegate, with 58% finding it challenging to release control. This attachment can manifest as volatility under pressure, creating tension with investors and board members who expect a more measured approach.

“Founders are used to being in control and doing everything themselves…they’ve known the business since the beginning and have played many roles and worn multiple hats. That’s not scalable,” one investor shared. “[Non-founder] CEOs have much more emotional distance from the business. It’s hard for the founder to take a step back and trust others will apply the same level of care.”

2. Some founders underinvest in operational governance to scale.

Founders prefer to chase new ideas rather than optimize existing ones, which means the very scrappiness that gets a startup off the ground can hinder its growth. Systems and processes may come less naturally (and be less enjoyable) to founder CEOs.

In contrast, 60% of non-founder CEOs excelled at operational excellence, instilling metrics-driven cultures. Jeff Hastings, founder and CEO-turned-CTO of BrightSign, admitted: “I’ve taken many companies to around $100 million in revenue. After doing startups for a while, I know that at this threshold, I am not as effective…on figuring out where the company should go next. We needed a new CEO who could scale the business.”

3. Many delay upgrading talent and removing underperformers.

Loyalty can be a liability. We found that more than half of the founder CEOs in our study hesitated when dealing with underperformers, often holding onto early employees longer than they should have.

“These are the people who got you from nothing to where you are,” Hastings acknowledged.  “You spend so much time with them — more time than you do with your spouse. They are very personal relationships. Whenever I’ve let someone go, I’ve never later wished I’d kept them. I always ask myself, ‘Why didn’t I do this sooner?’”

4. They can be inconsistent in communicating with and aligning key stakeholders.

More than half of the founders we analyzed were weaker at engaging investors and boards; by comparison more than a third of non-founders excelled in this area. “Some founders only tell you about their week and forget about the long-term plan,” one board member shared. “Others only talk about the long-term things and give you tactical progress updates.”

5. They are overly optimistic and may underestimate risk based on prior success.

The optimism that fuels a founder’s vision can blind them to potential pitfalls. Forty-two percent of founders in our study displayed an overly optimistic outlook, potentially underestimating risks based on past successes. On the other hand, 62% of non-founder CEOs studied brought a more pragmatic, risk-conscious approach to planning and execution.

One investor shared, “By definition, founder CEOs have built something from nothing and have been successful at it. This can create positive bias. As a result, they frequently overestimate what is feasible. Other CEOs may not think big enough; they see budgets as way too aggressive, while the founder CEO will say, ‘We can do much more than that.’”

Bridging Founder and Manager Modes

The key to unlocking a company’s full potential lies not in replacing “founder mode” with “manager mode” but in creating synergies between the two. This hybrid approach combines the founder’s special sauce with the operational rigor of professional management.

In the end, the founder’s “spikiness” is likely to be core to a startup’s success. By understanding and embracing the founder’s unique traits and challenges, everyone in the ecosystem — investors, board members, team members, and even the founders themselves — can create an environment where visionary thinking and operational excellence coexist.

About the Research: This article draws on ghSMART’s proprietary database of more than 27,000 C-suite executives, including more than 2,000 CEOs. Our research provides insights from assessments of 50 successful founder CEOs and 58 non-founder CEOs at private equity–backed companies. We analyzed key data points including these leaders’ most notable strengths and gaps, indicators of future potential, and predictors of CEO success (CEO Genome®). Additionally, we researched behavioral patterns, beginning in childhood, and examined their backgrounds, including previous CEO roles, founder experience, private equity involvement, CEO tenure, exits (if applicable), and demographic data. In parallel, we interviewed founder CEOs, non-founder CEOs, private equity investors, board members, and human capital leaders to test our hypotheses and add context to these findings.
