Precedents Thinking
How to innovate by combining old ideas by Stefanos Zenios and Ken Favaro

Summary.   What if “old wine in new bottles” is actually the secret to game-­changing innovation? The authors explore what they call precedents thinking, illustrating how radical breakthroughs such as Henry Ford’s assembly line and Reed Hastings’s Netflix model grew out of creative combinations of existing ideas. They describe the three-step process of precedents thinking: framing the challenge, searching for relevant precedents, and combining them to generate innovative solutions. They demonstrate how this method can drive innovation in both startups and established companies, drawing on the successes of DoorDash and a multinational they call Global Foods, among others 
When we teach innovation at the world’s largest companies and in Stanford University’s most popular courses on entrepreneurship, we often start by asking what these four innovations have in common: (1) the moving disassembly lines of Chicago slaughterhouses in the late 1800s; (2) quick-drying nitrocellulose black lacquer used in what is known as “japanning”; (3) staff profit-sharing, introduced by Procter & Gamble’s cofounder William Procter in 1887; and (4) Isaac Singer’s 19th-century network of local dealers selling sewing machines. Even the brightest corporate and startup minds rarely guess the correct answer. When revealed, however, it seems obvious: Henry Ford.

Inspired by the slaughterhouse process, Ford invented the moving assembly line. He adopted japanning to speed up production of the Model T, leading to his famous policy of offering “any color…as long as it’s black.” He introduced profit-sharing to reward speedy assembly workers and help them afford cars of their own. Mimicking Singer’s network of independent dealers, he avoided the expense of employing a widespread sales force. By combining those precedents, Ford transformed his struggling company into a market leader. As he later remarked, “I invented nothing new. I simply assembled the discoveries of other[s].”
Innovation can be daunting. Creating something entirely new feels intimidating. But that feeling misses a vital truth: Most great innovations are creative combinations of existing ideas. Examples abound. Reed Hastings, a cofounder of Netflix, reinvented the movie rental business by combining his local gym’s monthly membership model, Amazon’s online ordering and payment systems, the newly invented DVD format from Japan, and centralized warehousing of digital content. Warren Buffett transformed the failing textile company Berkshire Hathaway into a value-creating powerhouse by connecting three ideas: the “cigar butt” approach to buying businesses (which he learned from his Columbia Business School professor Benjamin Graham, who advised that companies with low valuations may have a few puffs of value left in them, much like a discarded cigar), the intrinsic cash-flow value approach to investing in “great businesses at a fair price” (which Buffett got from his longtime partner, Charlie Munger), and using insurance float—the cash collected from premiums before it has to be used to pay out claims—as a source of “free” capital (which came from Lorimer Davidson, then an investment officer for Geico and later its CEO).Ford, Hastings, and Buffett achieved breakthroughs by creatively combining prior innovations. From our experience helping student-entrepreneurs launch startups and CEOs innovate their strategies, we’ve perfected a method of unlocking this powerful source of innovation: precedents thinking. It involves three steps. First, frame your challenge and its key elements. Next, search for previous innovations—precedents—relevant to each element. Finally, combine some or all of those precedents—in part or in whole—to generate your best ideas. This is what Albert Einstein called “combinatory play.”
In practice each step can be revisited multiple times in light of learning from subsequent steps. You iterate through this process until your intuition tells you that you have a breakthrough that will work.
The Three Steps
Stanford’s entrepreneurship course “Startup Garage” has helped students launch more than 100 startups and attract more than $3 billion dollars’ worth of venture capital. One of those startups was the food-delivery company DoorDash. The four students who became its founding management team had a broad goal of helping small businesses increase their revenue. They followed the three steps of precedents thinking to develop and implement their idea.
Frame. The students began by interviewing 60 small-business owners. In one interview they learned that a bakery in Menlo Park, California, had to turn down 10 to 15 orders a week because the customers wanted delivery but the owner lacked the time to make it. Interviews with restaurant owners revealed the same problem: Other than pizza places and Chinese restaurants, few independent eateries have enough demand to justify building their own infrastructure. That research led the students to define the challenge they wanted to tackle: How can we enable independent restaurants and bakeries to offer their customers an economic and reliable delivery option?
Search. To develop a deeper understanding of that challenge, the members of the DoorDash team took part-time jobs as drivers for Domino’s, which had a long history of offering a well-regarded delivery service. They discovered that a key obstacle for the Domino’s model was extreme variability in demand. On some days drivers would be paid to do nothing because few orders came in; on other days high demand resulted in late deliveries and upset customers.
One advantage of precedents thinking is that it produces big ideas that don’t require a leap into the unknown and thus feel less risky.
Next the students took part-time jobs as FedEx drivers. They soon recognized that FedEx’s optimization of driving routes was critical to delivering packages economically within specified delivery windows. Finally, they read up on Uber, a then-exploding Silicon Valley startup with a transportation model that relied on gig workers and thus could adjust to uneven demand.
What the DoorDash founders learned helped them identify the five elements of the problem they had to solve to reach a workable solution: (1) how to manage variability in demand; (2) how to share a delivery infrastructure and network across independent restaurants and small bakeries; (3) how to seamlessly place and deliver orders; (4) how to keep delivery costs as low as possible; and (5) how to ensure that orders were delivered in a timely fashion. Their research on the relevant precedents—Domino’s, FedEx, and Uber—led them to the next step.
Combine. In this step an innovator takes pieces of past innovations that are pertinent to one or more elements of the overall problem and combines them to comprehensively solve it. The DoorDash team borrowed from the well-developed Domino’s mobile ordering system, which enables customers to conveniently place orders and track their progress. It copied Uber’s model of a driver network that could flex with changing demand. And it adopted FedEx’s route-optimization algorithms for minimizing delivery costs and accurately predicting and quoting delivery times to customers. That led the team to its big idea: a shared delivery infrastructure for restaurants that pooled drivers to adapt to fluctuations in demand and enable affordable just-in-time delivery. Three precedents helped launch a business that’s now worth more than $70 billion.
Not Just for Startups
Precedents thinking is practiced extensively in “Startup Garage.” We’ve also helped companies use it to generate innovative ideas for solving their most important business challenges. For example, the leaders of an enterprise we’ll call Global Foods, which one of us advised, used the method when their biggest and most profitable line of products was being stigmatized for contributing to the obesity epidemic in the United States, Mexico, and many other countries. The CEO called the situation “an existential threat.”
Using search engines, social media, internal small-group sessions, and external networking, the leaders identified 16 precedents that met three important criteria: They were highly relevant to at least one element of the challenge, were more than just a common best practice, and showed strong evidence of success beyond luck.
Only two of the 16 came from the food industry. Ten came from other business areas including agriculture, shoes, clothing, child entertainment, and professional sports. The other four came from outside the business world—for example, the way the Colombian metropolis Medellín reinvigorated its tourism industry after years of being called “the murder capital of the world,” and how Pope Francis changed perceptions of the Catholic Church when it was being stigmatized for its role in child abuse, gay rights, and the treatment of women.

The Bangalore-based photographer Sameer Raichur photographs cars transformed into wedding procession chariots, representing an intersection of old and new.
Playing with a handful of precedents at a time, Global Foods’ leaders produced ideas that led to a corporate transformation they called “volume to value.” It included changes to ingredients and packaging for its product lineup; a new pricing policy to encourage lower-volume, more-moderate servings; a sharper R&D and marketing focus on the functional benefits of its offerings; an increased focus on acquiring more-healthful food products; a more collaborative approach with its most vocal detractors; and a very public commitment to being part of the solution to obesity without accepting blame for causing it.
One of the advantages of precedents thinking, especially for large corporations, is that it produces big ideas that don’t require a leap into the unknown and thus feel less risky. Many of the changes adopted at Global Foods overturned more than a hundred years of corporate orthodoxy. But its leaders found the courage to implement them because the changes were based on successful precedents—and those changes worked. Within a few short years schools and governments backed off, radical detractors went quiet, and acceptance of Global Foods returned. The whole industry was transformed by the emergence of successful healthful-food startups that were subsequently acquired by companies like Global Foods.
Getting the Best Results
Through our work with entrepreneurs and CEOs, we have found four practices that optimize results from precedents thinking regardless of the context.
Find a novel framing of the problem. Most great innovations start with a novel framing. For example, Henry Ford began not with the conventional How can I make more money selling cars? but with How can I make cars more affordable for everyone? That made him unique among his peers, all of whom were more interested in how to make better cars for the 5% of the population that could already afford them.
Likewise, Reed Hastings didn’t frame his challenge around building a better Blockbuster or creating a better way to rent movies, although he managed to do both. It came to him while he was driving to his gym and ruminating on the late-return penalty he had to pay for Apollo 13. He asked himself, How could a movie-rental company operate like a gym? At the time, many people were familiar with Blockbuster’s late fees, Amazon, DVDs, and gym memberships, but it was Hastings’s unique framing that led him to combine them in an innovation that changed the world of entertainment.
A few techniques can help ensure that your framing is as novel as possible. The first is to strive to keep it neutral. That means being agnostic about the solution to the problem. For example, Ford’s focus on making cars affordable for everyone led to reducing the cost of selling them by using franchises, as Singer had done for sewing machines.
Another technique is to keep asking Why? Global Foods’ leaders spent a lot of time wondering why their company had been singled out. They ultimately agreed that the reason was simple: They were the strongest brand in a category whose products were no longer perceived as an acceptable “guilty pleasure.” They soon realized that this was actually an opportunity, because as the category leader, Global Foods could not only alter perceptions of the category but also increase its competitive advantage in the process. Thus the company’s leaders changed their framing from How should we respond to an existential threat to our business? to How can we turn a growing health-related stigma to our advantage?
That was essential to finding the 16 precedents that led to Global Foods’ industry-changing corporate innovation. For example, the Global Foods executives saw how Nike, which had faced significant backlash in the 1990s owing to allegations of overseas labor abuse, had reframed the issue as an opportunity to lead the industry in ethical labor practices. And they considered how Nintendo had turned criticism of gaming’s negative health effects to its advantage by introducing the Nintendo Wii, which featured motion-sensing technology that encouraged vigorous physical activity and was therefore seen as a healthful gaming alternative, boosting Nintendo’s market position and brand value.
A powerful way to find the best precedents is to create an innovation team whose members have as much work-life diversity as possible.
A third technique is allowing the framing to evolve—something that corporate leaders and student entrepreneurs who conceive viable breakthroughs often accomplish. Take LALA, another “Startup Garage” venture. The cofounder Diego Ontaneda’s original idea was to replicate the African Leadership Academy (ALA)—which develops promising teenagers from around Africa at a facility on the outskirts of Johannesburg—in Medellín. Ontaneda framed his challenge as How can I launch a successful high-touch leadership-development program for teenagers in Latin America?
But he soon discovered that Latin American donors were skeptical of the donor-supported, high-fee ALA model. So fees in his model would need to be modest, and the program would have to be much leaner and more decentralized. He reframed the challenge as How can I launch an affordable, scalable, and decentralized lifelong leadership-development program to bring together promising teenagers from across the continent? That led him to add online learning to the precedents and to develop a virtual-learning model with satellites in multiple countries that scaled up quickly and transformed donor skepticism into enthusiasm.
The more novel and evolved your framing, the more likely you are to find an innovative solution to your problem. Perhaps that’s why Einstein claimed, “If I had an hour to solve a problem, I’d spend 55 minutes thinking about the problem and five minutes thinking about solutions.”
Search both near and far for precedents. When applying precedents thinking, inspiration from both within your domain and outside it is essential. Jake Kneller is a cofounder of Sweet Nothings, a “Startup Garage” venture that pioneered the concept of frozen smoothies in grocery stores. He hit a roadblock when trying to sell through national grocery chains because his products were placed in the same section as ice creams, which are not perceived as healthful. To solve that challenge Kneller drew inspiration from Stacy’s Pita Chips, which had managed to get its items placed near hummus rather than with crackers. Kneller’s team worked with grocers to position Sweet Nothings in the frozen fruit section, which led to rapid adoption.
Sweet Nothings’ inspiration came from a nearby precedent, but faraway precedents can be even more powerful. For example, the mathematician Ada Lovelace laid the foundation for modern computing when she recognized that the way looming machines used punch cards to complete textile patterns could be used to specify more-general computational instructions. Likewise, Jorge Odon, an auto mechanic from Argentina, was inspired by a technique for removing a cork from an empty bottle to create the Odon device for easier childbirth. The Pope Francis and Medellín precedents were particularly inspiring to Global Foods’ leaders, and two of the three precedents that inspired DoorDash (FedEx and Uber) had nothing to do with delivering food.
In our experience, the best way to find pertinent out-of-domain innovations is to “disassociate” the elements of your problem such that they are no longer specific to your domain, and to move from asking How? to asking Who? For example, instead of How can we share delivery infrastructure and resources across independent restaurants and small bakeries? ask, Who has shared infrastructure or resources across multiple autonomous entities? Instead of How can we take a leadership position around obesity concerns? ask, Who showed visible leadership for a societal issue they didn’t create?
You’d never recognize those alternative questions as being for a restaurant-delivery startup or a global food company. That’s by design. Disassociation helps you look in other boxes to stimulate more outside-the-box thinking.
Another powerful way to find the best precedents is to create an innovation team whose members have as much work-life diversity as possible. Someone who has had a variety of experiences is far more likely to bring inspiration from outside the problem domain.

Sameer Raichur
We have found that engaging with large language models can accelerate a productive search for precedents, particularly out-of-domain ones. First give the LLM context and background on the challenge you are trying to solve (the more detail, the better). Then enter questions to guide the LLM’s search for precedents, at least two or three for each element of your problem. For example, in a recent workshop on precedents thinking we challenged a group of executives to evaluate how autonomous vehicles will change business models in the auto industry. One of the elements of this challenge was how to persuade skeptical consumers to ride in an autonomous vehicle when they were worried about safety. The executives asked Microsoft Copilot, Who has successfully persuaded consumers to adopt a new technology that was perceived as potentially unsafe? Electric vehicles were included in its response, which was unhelpful. So they modified the prompt to add Please provide additional examples from outside the auto industry. That led Copilot to name microwave ovens, mobile payments, and vaccines. Another modification—Who has successfully persuaded consumers to engage in new ways of doing things that were previously perceived as unsafe?—led to telemedicine.
Foster combinatory play. In our work with both startup and legacy businesses, combinatory play has resulted in innovations that might never have happened otherwise. Indeed, the first two steps of precedents thinking—frame and search—are really just (necessary) preparation for the breakthroughs that come from creative combinations.
We find that combinatory play is best done first individually and then in groups. Reed Hastings himself came up with the idea of putting together gym memberships with online commerce and DVDs to create what became Netflix. The theory of gravity came from the idea of one person—Isaac Newton— to combine Kepler’s work on the movement of heavenly bodies with Galileo’s law of falling bodies. People need private time and space for their minds to make the unexpected connections between precedents that lead to “aha!” moments.
However, combinatory play in groups is also essential to getting the best results from precedents thinking. Individuals can bring something to the table that sparks a great idea from someone else. For example, one of Henry Ford’s employees, William Klann, told Ford about the moving disassembly lines for slaughtering cattle that Ford adapted to auto manufacturing.
There are two keys to fostering combinatory play in groups. The first is to be fully aligned on the challenge you are trying to solve. As Henry Ford said, “Ideas are everywhere. You just have to know what you are looking for.”
The framing DoorDash’s founders chose for their problem didn’t just fall out of a tree and hit them on the head. They spent weeks exploring the challenges that small businesses face before agreeing on what problem they would tackle. Likewise, Global Foods’ leaders invested a lot of time to understand why all the previous effort and money spent to solve its stigma problem had not moved the needle. In the beginning, each leader had a different explanation: being the leader in a category that had lost its consumer acceptance; being an easy target for government; having the wrong marketing, and so on—seven explanations in all. It took the group several weeks to align on how to frame the challenge and on what elements of the problem had to be solved.
For both DoorDash and Global Foods, aligning on the framing of the problem was essential to aiming their combinatory play at the right target. Having multiple versions of a challenge can send people’s creative thinking in very different directions, resulting in a scattergun, conventional, and ultimately ineffectual approach to innovating.
The second key is for every team member to fully internalize every precedent before the team comes together. The leaders of Global Foods filled in a template for each of the 16 precedents they found in their search. The templates had three parts: detailed background on the situation; three to four insights that were relevant to one or more elements of the problem at hand; and evidence of the precedent’s success. Each leader was expected to spend time digesting the information on each precedent over the course of several weeks and to generate at least one creative combination. That proved essential to having every leader primed and ready for combinatory play.
Use precedents thinking to guide execution, too. Precedents thinking is not just for generating big ideas; it’s for bringing them to fruition. Studying relevant precedents in depth and learning from their key implementation tactics can make the difference between success and failure. The experience of Jack McCarthy, a cofounder and the CEO of Gold Leaf Farming, another “Startup Garage” company, is instructive.
Subscribe to our Monthly Newsletter
Strategy & Execution
The tools you need to craft strategic plans — and how to make them happen.
Sign Up
Gold Leaf acquires and operates pistachio and almond farms for private wealth-management firms. Inspired by residential real estate investment trusts (REITs) and search funds (an investment vehicle popular among Stanford MBAs), Gold Leaf started out by acquiring farms for its investors and hiring third parties to manage them. But McCarthy soon discovered that farms managed by third parties did not perform well. He embarked on a systematic search for precedents that would help his company address this challenge and found Lineage, a REIT that acquires and manages cold-storage warehouses. He studied the approach Lineage used to manage its facilities in depth and then developed a strategy for operating the farms in a similar fashion. By bundling some of the innovations Lineage had pioneered with a high-quality recruitment program for farm managers modeled on McKinsey’s hiring practices, Gold Leaf developed its own internal team and operations for managing farms. That turned its model around and helped it attract more capital.
Precedents can also guide the choice of experiments to run when testing the viability of a novel business idea. Their experience with FedEx guided the DoorDash founders. Given the very thin margins in restaurant delivery, their venture’s success relied heavily on completing multiple deliveries per hour. Their first experiments focused on whether the lessons from FedEx could be applied to deliver the minimum number of orders necessary, according to their early economic analyses, to break even. Once they proved that the FedEx precedent was truly applicable to their challenge, they were ready to raise their first significant round of funding, because they could make investors confident that their big idea would work.
. . .
Competition to be the first with a great idea is fierce. The key to winning lies in combining old ideas in new ways to solve creatively framed problems. Business leaders and entrepreneurs who are willing to revisit, reshape, and reapply established ideas will unlock value creation in unexpected places. Precedents thinking offers a repeatable, reliable approach to help them do that. And although it can be demanding, the more that leaders and entrepreneurs use it—when refreshing strategies, reinventing business models, developing new products, building novel businesses, and tackling any business challenge—the more innovative they and everyone around them will become.
Read more on Entrepreneurship or related topics Innovation, Start-ups, Business plans, Inventions and Creativity
A version of this article appeared in the March–April 2025 issue of Harvard Business Review.

