How Founders Can Avoid the Deception Trap
by Raghu Garud, Yuliya Snihur, Llewellyn D.W. Thomas and Nelson Phillips
January 8, 2025

Summary.   Entrepreneurs walk a razor-thin line between telling compelling stories and peddling lies — a misstep can easily lead to slipping into what the authors call the “deception trap.” It starts when entrepreneurs, through their storytelling and framing, establish their identities, promote their visions, and set expectations for themselves and their stakeholders. Yet, framing the future can easily turn into a vicious cycle of expanding deceit if expectations cannot be met and entrepreneurs attempt to deliver at all costs. Entrepreneurs should take a few steps to protect themselves: 1) set realistic stretch goals and keep stakeholders informed of the risks, 2) understand the “fail” in “fail fast” as rapid experimentation to identify promising alternatives, not a license to take poorly conceived risks, and 3) be realistic when creating early prototypes and reporting on milestones.

There is an increasingly familiar story in the tech world: After a meteoric rise, a dazzling young wunderkind is disgraced when it’s revealed that their world-changing innovation is held together by promises and deceit. Recently, it was Sam Bankman-Fried, found guilty of seven counts of fraud. But a downfall like Bankman-Fried’s is all too familiar, as is the hubris, ambition, greed, and persuasive (but ultimately deceptive) storytelling that preceded it. What is, perhaps, most notable about this story is how unremarkable it is.
Entrepreneurs walk a razor-thin line between telling compelling stories and peddling lies — a misstep can easily lead to slipping into what we call the “deception trap.” This insight is based on our ongoing multi-year study about the dark side of entrepreneurship. Our collective expertise on entrepreneurial framing, scaling, hype and deception shows that the deception trap is ever present for entrepreneurs.
The deception trap is a problematic cycle of interactions between entrepreneurs and their stakeholders. It starts when entrepreneurs, through their storytelling and framing, establish their identities, promote their visions, and set expectations for themselves and their stakeholders. Yet, framing the future can easily turn into a vicious cycle of expanding deceit if expectations cannot be met and entrepreneurs attempt to deliver at all costs.
Ironically, this trap emerges because of entrepreneurs’ strong instinct to succeed. In the case of another entrepreneur recently convicted of fraud — Carlos Watson of Ozy Media — prosecutors argued, “he was determined to turn Ozy and himself into the next big thing, and he wasn’t going to let the truth stand in his way.”
The Slippery Slope of Deception
Entrepreneurs in the early stages of a startup must convey their future vision and an ability to see it through to potential customers, partners, and investors. This is especially true in tech, where so much of the innovation is uncertain, with many product features still untested, business models ill-defined, and customer adoption still murky. As a result, founders frame their venture’s future in abstract and aspirational ways, pitching it as “the Amazon-of-X” or “Uber-but-for-Y” illustrating their ambition rather than concrete capabilities early on. In doing so, they are pitching not only their ventures but also themselves, for example, Bankman-Fried’s embodiment of scruff or Theranos founder Elizabeth Holmes’ feigned baritone. Celebrity endorsements and investments, as well as partnerships with established companies also contribute to the apparent legitimacy of entrepreneurs and their ventures. Indeed, a powerfully framed story can help audiences make sense of what may initially seem fantastical.
However, these make-or-break first impressions can lay the seeds of later challenges, when entrepreneurs first begin to flirt with deceit by embellishing reality or simply promising too much. The first step towards the deception trap is often taken when unmet expectations cause investors, business partners, customers, and regulators to raise eyebrows and ask tough questions. At this point, entrepreneurs can no longer resort to vagueness, discuss abstract ideas, or bank on charm. Instead, they may be tempted to blur the truth, moving into embellishments, misrepresentation, and flagrant lies as they are asked to show concrete results.
Desperation to meet expectations can also lead to doubling down on lies and the adoption of unrealistic stretch goals, with ever bigger promises to obscure the original lie and maintain enthusiasm among supporters. As ventures come under increasing scrutiny, employees become complicit, often staying silent for fear of reprimand, lawsuits, or because they have substantial personal investment in the venture.
This is where stakeholders come into the picture. Indeed, the deception trap is as much about encouragement from stakeholders such as partners, investors, or board members as it is about the behavior of entrepreneurs. A culture of encouraging entrepreneurs to be ambitious adds impetus to the natural tendency of entrepreneurs to be bold, but also runs the risk of pushing entrepreneurs into the deception trap.
How exactly do stakeholders participate in the process? After stakeholders have invested time, money and effort in the venture, they want to see returns and so may disregard issues, which, if made public, could diminish the value of their investments. For others, their reputation is at stake, especially if their involvement with the venture is widely known.
While some stakeholders may not be aware of deception, others may encourage entrepreneurs to “fake it till they make it,” and, in doing so, encourage entrepreneurs deeper into falsehoods. Only when the deception bubble bursts and entrepreneurs publicly fail to deliver do stakeholders reconsider their ethical stance; for instance, by retrospectively condemning the entrepreneurs for cheating throughout the journey even when they may have encouraged such behavior earlier. This was the case with Theranos and its founder Elizabeth Holmes, who was roundly vilified by leading names in tech as an exception and outsider after her fall from grace — even as her trial revealed her to be deeply embedded in Silicon Valley’s culture. Ironically, if entrepreneurs are successful, then they are hailed as heroes even if deception is known to have fueled the process; that is, all is forgiven in a “fake it till you make it” culture.
Avoiding the Deception Trap for Entrepreneurs
Our extensive study of this phenomenon reveals that even those who do not want to fall into the deception trap may find themselves slipping into it. Entrepreneurs, to the extent they realize such possibilities up front, may like to take some precautionary steps.
First, it is important to set realistic stretch goals and keep stakeholders informed of the risks and practicalities of scaling up. Downplaying challenges is just a step away from the escalation of commitments to failing courses of action involving embellishments and complete fabrications. JPMorgan Chase learned this when they uncovered that 72% of 4.2 million customer emails were faked by the founder Charlie Javice when she sold her student loan startup Frank to them. (Javice has pleaded not guilty to fraud charges and her trial is scheduled for February 2025.)
Second, a more nuanced understanding of “fail” in “fail fast” is required. Entrepreneurs all too often construe it as a license to take poorly conceived risks and design bad experiments, which can lead to expensive failures. Subsequently, entrepreneurs hide such flops based on outlandish assumptions and duplicitous justifications, which can then lead to embellishments and fabrications. This is even more likely when “fail fast” is part of a culture that also advocates “fake it until you make it.”
It is best to understand the “fail” in “fail fast” as rapid experimentation to identify promising alternatives. But such experimentation must be undertaken in a disciplined fashion, based on well-thought-out hypotheses and assumptions, rigorous experimental techniques (such as A/B testing), transparent reporting of the results, and subsequent decisions about product rollouts. In other words, there is a difference between fast-and-loose faking and failing and evidence-based disciplined learning from experimentation.
Third, and equally important, is to be realistic when creating early prototypes and reporting on milestones. While it may be easy to build many features into a prototype, it can be difficult not to slide into creating vaporware — announcing features that do not exist or may prove too expensive to release at scale. Indeed, prototypes that demonstrate proof-of-concept can all too easily become the source of deception and fabrication when rushed into the market without appropriate qualifications to meet expectations set earlier. Illustrations include Theranos’s prototype, the Edison machine, which served as the basis for an ill-fated partnership with Walgreens and Safeway to deliver its blood tests to the masses, and Nikola’s electric Badger truck that ended up in court due to the founder’s misleading claims about the underlying technology.
How Stakeholders Can Preempt the Deception Trap
So long as “fake it till you make it” remains a prevailing attitude in entrepreneurship, and stakeholders expect entrepreneurs to meet exaggerated projections in the face of fundamental uncertainty — even when on failing trajectories — the deception trap will continue to snare even well-meaning entrepreneurs. Consequently, stakeholder involvement to preempt the deception trap is also key.
First, independent due diligence and an ongoing awareness of what the entrepreneur is up to are essential. This did not happen in the case of Theranos. For example, Alan Eisenman, a Theranos investor, noted that he learned about the venture through a close friend, a financial adviser to Ms. Holmes’s family. As reported in a Wall Street Journal article covering the trial, Mr. Eisenman said that a few of the Theranos founder’s statements impressed him, including “that Oracle Corp. cofounder Larry Ellison was an investor and board member” and that “Theranos had contracts with a handful of large pharmaceutical companies, including Pfizer Inc., which he said put an initial stamp of approval on this investment.”
Second, as this Theranos example illustrates, stepping back to reflect is vital for stakeholders. Rather than operate on the assumption that earlier stakeholders have already researched the start-up, it is beneficial for new stakeholders to carry out their own analyses. Celebrity endorsement could be due to excessive hype rather than because a real opportunity exists.
Third, remaining aware of the uncertainty associated with entrepreneurial endeavors is also important. In this regard, stakeholders may not gain access to the information they need from entrepreneurs, such as technology specifications or customer lists that might be kept secret. When entrepreneurs make unreasonable claims of secrecy, stakeholders have the right to become suspicious when tangible data about the core facets of the venture are not forthcoming. Under these circumstances, they must insist on evidence from the entrepreneurs. For instance, they can demand to see prototypes working in the field with the help of independent expert opinions (particularly important for high or deep tech).
Fourth, keeping an eye out for deception is even more necessary when an entrepreneurial opportunity is hyped; that is, when expectations about the venture, technology, or market are collectively inflated. For instance, some experienced investors acknowledged that they wrote checks to Theranos on the basis that it was “driving the future of medicine” without seeing financial statements or doing much to verify its technology and promises and despite their doubts about the company’s claims.
Fifth, for stakeholders, it is key to follow the motto “trust but verify.” They must avail themselves of common-sense tests of startup claims, such as the size of the market vs. claimed number of customers, the monetization possibilities for the adopted business model, and realistic adoption rates and acquisition costs.
Overall, stakeholders need to stay alert across the whole entrepreneurial journey for signs of entrepreneurial moral disengagement and clarify for themselves why they continue supporting the entrepreneur even as warning signs mount. By keeping multiple information channels open, actively seeking all data points, insisting on periodic pacing of proof points (e.g., tracking real progress on relevant metrics during board meetings), and paying attention to whistle blowers when they suspect something is afoul, stakeholders can help entrepreneurs avoid the deception trap.
System Overhaul?
There is no doubt that entrepreneurship can transform industries and societies. But there is a dark side to entrepreneurship where even well-intentioned entrepreneurs can fall victim to the deception trap, with stakeholders knowingly or even unwittingly contributing to the process by adding to the hype in the name of hope.
Consequently, the much-lauded entrepreneurial culture of overambition needs an overhaul. Building a better entrepreneurial culture is a job for everyone. Entrepreneurs, investors, business partners, and employees must all stay alert, perform due diligence and not get swept away with early-stage excitement. Business school educators can warn budding entrepreneurs about the dangers of overpromising and underdelivering. And entrepreneurs must be clear about the implications of the slippery slope of deception for themselves and others to make sure their efforts create rather than destroy value for society.
