4 Pillars of Innovation Every Organization Needs
by Stephen Wunker
September 05, 2024

Summary.   
Innovation doesn’t just come from serendipity. Leaders who nurture great ideas rely on concrete mechanisms to ensure that they see the right ideas, give them breathing room to development, and connect dots throughout their organizations. In any company, the challenge with innovation is seldom the volume of ideas. The challenge lies with having ideas that are related to emerging trends, involve more than the company can do on its own, require nurturing, and are cross-functional in nature. Through interviews with 50 leaders across industries, the author observed patterns of successful innovation repeat across highly distinct settings. Those patterns are what he calls the four pillars of innovation. If you’re struggling to nurture the right ideas, creating these four pillars for innovation can improve the odds that you’ll have high-quality ideas in your pipeline.
A company’s big challenge with innovation is seldom the volume of ideas. Indeed, in a survey conducted this year by my company, only 6% of corporate innovators said that their biggest problem was having too few ideas. But not all ideas are equal, and poor or highly derivative ideas might consume far too much attention. Frequently those ideas are related to emerging trends, involve more than the company can do on its own, require nurturing, and are cross-functional in nature. The real need is to ensure that the right ideas get ahead and get considered.
So what do you do?
During the research for my book The Innovative Leader: Step-by-Step Lessons from Top Innovators for You and Your Organization, four pillars of innovation became apparent. Together with my coauthors, Jennifer Luo Law and Hari Nair, we interviewed 50 leaders across a variety of industries, from tech giants at Google and Microsoft to the CEO of Singapore’s largest bank and the head of an elementary school service. We observed patterns of successful innovation repeating across highly distinct settings.
If you’re struggling to nurture the right ideas, creating these four pillars for innovation can improve the odds that you’ll have high-quality ideas in your pipeline.
Trend Sensing
Companies frequently hop on trends, but many do so only once the trends are well into their lifecycle. That can be costly and risky — market values may already reflect discovery of the trend, and the trend may have peaked. Nestle, for instance, bought the lean diet company Jenny Craig in 2006 for approximately $600 million, after weight loss trends were already starting to move away from Jenny Craig’s focus on fat content due to new discoveries in nutrition science. Nestle then sold the business cheaply seven years later as it divested several underperforming brands.
There are other failure modes for trend sensing, too. Firms can discuss trends in abstract ways — like how the population is aging — without tying them to specific changes in customer needs, supplier capabilities, operational challenges, or competitive pressures. Alternatively, trend sensing may become a soapbox for opinionated individuals to make the industry their inkblot test, asserting big strategic implications from ambiguous signals, such as arguing that the growth of AI means that companies should bring more IT capabilities in-house. That can lead to expensive missteps as companies overpay for assets that may be on-trend but lack other strengths such as competitive differentiation or favorable economics. Witness perhaps the most disastrous merger of all-time: Time Warner’s with AOL during the dot-com bubble. 
What to do instead: For a contrast, look at PepsiCo, the multinational food and beverage powerhouse. It held a “Do Us a Flavor” competition for Lay’s potato chips from 2012 to 2018, seeking ideas from consumers for its next flavor. It didn’t actually need new ideas — the company has plenty — but this was an excellent way to track what flavor interests were trending and where. (The first year’s winner: cheesy garlic bread).
Ultimately the program ended in part due to its popularity — going through up to 3.8 million entries a year required a tremendous amount of labor and management time. The contest boasted characteristics of effective trend-sensing programs: It surfaced trends in real-time, was inexpensive, produced specific implications, and was objective. Whether you sponsor a contest, go prospecting at conferences for adjacent industries, talk to your most passionate users, or embrace other methods, these parameters guide effective searches for trends.
Strategic Partnerships
You don’t have to contain yourself to your team or the organization when it comes to innovation. Great innovations can come from collaborations with suppliers, customers, universities, startups, or companies using relevant technology in a totally different way.
For example, the jeans company Levi Strauss has been collaborating with Google to figure out what “smart” clothing might accomplish for users. But doing so needs focused and dedicated work. That means you need to find people within the team to do the long-term work of building those relationships, having speculative conversations, and hunting for partner capabilities that may not be immediately apparent. You don’t want to be Yahoo, which declined to engage with an ambitious early-stage company boasting a different business model: Google. 
What to do instead: Put specialists in strategic technology partnerships on the lookout. Have them work in collaboration with core business teams who can use these partnerships to make innovation happen. For example, many pharma companies have these types of partnership offices near MIT, and it’s an approach that can be replicated by a broad range of industries. Johnson & Johnson’s university collaborations not only facilitate investments and research partnerships, but they also provide lab space and support services for promising startups without requiring an equity stake. This can give Johnson & Johnson an inside track with the startup when the timing is ripe. The fruits of the program have been substantial — as of 2023, 840 incubations of companies in this network had yielded more than 290 deals or partnerships with J&J. 
Intrapreneur Programs
Where do employees with big ideas go? Often, they make their big ideas small to get approved easily, or they simply leave. History is witness to how Steve Wozniak left HP because it wouldn’t do anything with his design for an early personal computer — the Apple I. In fact, they rejected it five times! Organizations serving the core business day-to-day may hesitate to take the ideas on board because they don’t fit their operating model and may drain resources and take too long to pay off. To fight these challenges, companies need to provide a structured way for idea champions to build out their concepts without over-committing to them before they’re ready. 
What to do instead: Foster intrapreneurs — entrepreneurs inside the firm. At Google, where employees may be tempted to depart and form startups, they have the option to compete for funding and the opportunity to work on their concept for six months, with the guarantee they can have their old job back afterward. Management bases its evaluation of the ideas based partly on how many employees elect to work on them. If the venture fails, the people behind it aren’t punished. Gmail is a great example of how google fosters intrapreneurs. When we interviewed Matt Vokoun, VP of Strategy and Business Operations at Google, he told us that it was the one thing that made him believe that Google was serious about innovation.
Innovation Communities
Innovations often happen at intersections, yet many companies lack ways for innovators to connect informally and see where conversations go. This can also make innovation a lonely endeavor. It doesn’t cost much or take a lot of time to provide people with common innovation interests a means to connect and exchange ideas. At the very least, it’ll help keep them motivated. At best, it may trigger new kinds of cross-disciplinary collaborations that open up previously unseen vectors for change. Don’t be Atari, which was abandoned in frustration by another future Apple co-founder: Steve Jobs. 
What to do instead: Cultivate community. Take the German life sciences company, Bayer. Bayer has created an internal community of 700 innovators around the world who use common resources, join competitions against one another, and nominate local representatives to participate in an annual meeting. These connections then enable discussions about ways to cross-apply methods, business models, and other capabilities that can translate across business units. For instance, the program helped create agricultural finance options that are now offered around the world, stemming in part from an idea that originated in Bayer’s corporate finance and marketing departments in Greece.
. . .
Innovation doesn’t just come from serendipity. The leaders we researched rely on concrete mechanisms to ensure that they see the right ideas, give them breathing room to develop, and look for intersections within the company where innovation can thrive. throughout their organizations. These four pillars can help transform innovation from one-off achievements into consistent capabilities.
