Research: The Risks of Founding a Startup Near Big Companies
by Jim Bessen, Felix Poege, and Ronja Röttger
November 12, 2024

Summary.   
When startups are deciding where to locate, many consider setting up shop in “tech clusters” that have developed labor markets for the specialized staff that startups need to grow. Yet these areas are dense with talent for a reason: It’s often due to the presence of large firms with whom these fledgling companies must compete. In a new study, researchers found that when large firms increase their hiring, startups in the same location are forced to offer 10% higher salaries, while reducing their expected growth by 36%. While talent-rich communities may be alluring, they can stifle startups ability to scale — a finding which should be incorporated into startups’ landscape analyses.close
Startups often choose to base their fledgling companies in “tech clusters,” seeking to benefit from these areas’ developed labor markets for technical, sales, and managerial staff — typically arising from a significant presence of large firms. Yet while this proximity to talent can provide access to the specialists a startup may need to scale, it also forces these new companies to offer high wages to compete with the offerings of their large firm competitors. Spending large amounts on salaries can leave less capital for other important initiatives, like experimentation or marketing, which can in turn make it harder for startups to reach a growth phase.
So what should startups do? Does the benefit of being close to talent outweigh the financial burden of attracting it away from big firms? And what part do large firms play in this?  In new research, we analyzed more than 180 million job ads placed between 2010 and 2020, including ads from more than 140,000 U.S. startups founded in that decade. We found that local large firm hiring patterns have a significant impact on startups’ ability to grow. We examine our findings and offer recommendations for startups looking to navigate this complicated landscape in order to take advantage of resource-rich locations without being crowded out.
When Competition Drives Up Salaries  
Startups initially consist of a founder team and a set of early employees that join through informal networks. But once a startup attempts to grow larger, it enters formal labor markets, including by posting job advertisements. In order to explore how large firm hiring affects local startups, we analyzed the online job ads of more than 140,000 U.S. startups founded between 2010 and 2020, and compared them to the more than 180 million ads posted in this timeframe.  
We found that when large firms increase their hiring, startups in the same location are forced to offer up to 10% more for crucial roles, while reducing their expected growth by 36%, compared to startups that did not experience a corresponding increase in exposure to large firms. This is true even when controlling for factors such as industry, economic conditions (like recessions or booms), location, startup characteristics, and education and experience requirements. We also found that this “crowding out” effect is particularly pronounced for critical positions like management, STEM, and sales.
The Firms That Pose the Biggest Threats
Intuitively, large firms with very similar business models to startups may appear to be the most dangerous, as they rely on the same specialists and may be more attractive to talented local workers because of larger salaries or benefit offerings. To investigate the impact of similarity on startup growth, we used the business descriptions of large firms and startups to create similarity scores — a high score meant that a firm and startup had more similar businesses, and a low score meant they were relatively dissimilar.
We found that the higher the similarity, the weaker the crowding effects for startups — though they were still present. When startups are similar to surrounding large firms, their growth (in terms of the number of job ads they posted relative to other startups)  only diminished by 20%, whereas dissimilar startups saw decreases by up to 60%. This seems to suggest that similarity can offset some of the negative growth impacts that startups may experience when they have to offer higher salaries. This data thus provides evidence that large firms do not create “kill zones” in the labor market for startups interested in pursuing similar aims, even as they still seem to have a negative impact on a startups’ success.
How to Compete in Dense Markets
So how can startups incorporate these findings when making a location decision? We offer some suggestions.
Critically consider the talent your business will require.
For startups considering moves, it is important to incorporate the presence of large firms — including those in other sectors – into a landscape analysis. For startups considering pivots: When possible, take advantage of complementarity to the incumbent’s technology. As our studies found, firms who have very similar businesses may have a smaller negative impact on a startup’s ability to scale.
For potential investors, the same applies in reverse. In an analysis of prospective ventures, financiers should try to understand the labor requirements that scaling will bring, and consider how important potential labor markets are to a company’s success.
When engaged in competition for talent, broaden your horizon.
Startups based in crowded regions still have several ways to avoid head-to-head salary competition with incumbents. They can focus on internal advancement opportunities, emphasizing the chances of individuals to have impact and to develop a strong employer brand. Internal development may be most important for the managerial, STEM, and sales positions that are most affected by crowding, so efforts should be targeted to those, and special economic incentives should be deployed there.
Besides internal advancement, startups should explore alternative ways of talent acquisition, particularly if the formal labor market is clogged, personal networks are exhausted, and headhunters are too expensive. Startups should remain nimble and play to their strengths in terms of allowing remote work to shed the limitation to the local labor market. These can be networks, internship and apprenticeship opportunities, university relationships, and remote workers, both near-shoring and off-shoring. Additionally, startups should increase their openness to employees from non-traditional careers and backgrounds.
Understand regional policymaking.
When choosing a location, startups should consider not only the landscape of firms that are already present, but also the orientation of local policymakers. Some regional policies are poised to provide a better balance between the presence of large firms and the needs of the entrepreneurial community. For example, regional policymakers frequently seek to attract large firms with tax and other incentives, and we show that they face a tradeoff in doing so. Large firms can increase agglomeration economies in a region, but crowding might diminish or even reverse these benefits. Regions that recruit large firms with a specialized focus and have policies that improve employee mobility, such as non-enforcement of employee non-compete agreements, might diminish crowding and provide the most fertile environment for long-run startup success.
Possible Limitations
While our research provides evidence that local large firms can have a stifling impact on startups’ ability to grow, a limitation of this study is that it is generally hard to study or pinpoint spillover impacts. For example, we found that when firms and startups are similar, the crowding out impact is smaller than when firms and startups are dissimilar. We hypothesize that this is because these firms provide spillover benefits in the form of idea generation (entrepreneurial spawning and spinouts, for example), although we did not measure these effects in our study.
Additionally, we measured startup growth by how many jobs they were able to post compared with other startups at similar gestations, but there are many other ways of measuring growth that we did not examine in this study, for example, revenue. That said, our work provides compelling evidence that large firms seem to affect the growth of startups within the same commuting zones.
. . .
Startups looking to grow may very well find the talent they need by locating in talent-rich communities. Our research finds, however, that there are significant drawbacks to locating near large firms, as their hiring patterns can have a stifling impact on startups’ ability to scale. When startups must compete for talent by paying higher salaries, it can deplete limited financial resources, making growth in other areas more difficult. Incorporating our findings into any landscape analysis — and seeking new avenues to find employees — may help startups navigate the talent wars to grow successfully.