How to Identify the Perfect Cofounder
Not every entrepreneur needs a partner—but if you do, follow this process to find your match. by Julia Austin

Summary.   One of the first and most important decisions entrepreneurs make is whether to go it alone or bring on cofounders. Many investors favor startups with multiple founders, believing that a team reduces business risk by diversifying skills, sharing responsibilities, and preventing burnout. But forcing a cofounder relationship can do more harm than good: Research has shown that conflict within the founding team is one of the primary reasons high-potential startups fail. Entrepreneurs should consider bringing on a cofounder if they have unmet needs in three key areas: partnership, expertise, and experience. Finding the right cofounder is not as difficult as finding a life partner, but it’s close. It is critical to think carefully about what you want in a cofounder and spend time nurturing prospective relationships. Key steps in the courtship process include conducting a listening tour, writing a job description, “dating” various candidates, and having a prenuptial conversation. 
I’ve spent three decades as a successful, serial startup operator and an investor in entrepreneurial ventures, and I’ve seen firsthand what makes or breaks a cofounding team. I’ve worked for and with hundreds of entrepreneurs, I teach entrepreneurship at Harvard Business School, and I’ve surveyed over 100 founding management teams. My research and experience have revealed that when a great match happens it can be magic—but like any marriage, a cofounder relationship should not be entered into rashly. In this article, I offer guidance to help entrepreneurs decide whether they need a cofounder, and if so, how to go about finding the right one.
Do You Need a Cofounder?
Before embarking on the courtship process, it’s important to first assess whether you need a cofounder at all. There is conflicting data on the correlation between a cofounding team and successful outcomes. For example, research by venture capitalist Ali Tamaseb for his book Super Founders showed that only one in five unicorns are founded by a single person; meanwhile, a Wharton study found that startups with single founders last longer and achieve higher revenue. But overall the data suggests that having a cofounder leads to more financial success.
When deciding whether to bring on a cofounder, you should evaluate whether you have unmet needs in three key areas:
Partnership. Of the founders I surveyed, 83% reported that having a collaborator and a creative partner were their primary drivers for seeking a cofounder. Many entrepreneurs appreciate having someone to brainstorm with, share the workload, and commiserate with during the journey. If those are things you’ve valued in the past, you are likely to benefit from a partnership.
Having cofounders—like being in a committed personal relationship—is a big test of your ability to be vulnerable, handle conflict, and compromise. Cofounding teams must constantly grapple with important issues, from product and hiring decisions to operating procedures and fundraising strategy. Being able to process those decisions together and work through disagreements is essential to a healthy cofounding relationship. Eliza Becton of Bevi, a smart-water-dispenser startup that I was an angel investor in, shared her first-year experience with her cofounder Sean Grundy: “We fought like siblings when we disagreed on product direction or company priorities, but it was always coming from a good-hearted place because we cared so much about each other and our venture.” Becton and Grundy had a willingness to lean into healthy discourse. They were open with each other about the roles they wanted to play at the company, which is critical in a cofounding relationship. “Because our product was my idea at the start, Sean advocated for me to be the CEO of the company,” Becton said. “But it didn’t take long for me to realize that’s not a job I love. I am a product designer and was much happier focusing there. So we agreed he’d take that role.”
If the prospect of hashing out roles and compromising on things like financing or product decisions gives you pause, you may need to do some introspective work before taking on a cofounder, or perhaps go it alone.
Expertise. Self-awareness is critical to forging successful cofounder partnerships. It begins with an honest assessment of your technical and domain expertise. You must know what you don’t know—where you have gaps—and consider how a cofounder’s knowledge may be additive to the venture. A technologist may lack management or operating skills, for instance, and a sales leader may lack technical or strategic skills. Some capabilities can be learned on the job, but early-stage founders often underestimate how long that can take and the extent to which rookie mistakes can set back (or kill) a business when it’s barely out of the gate. If you have lots of time and money, you may be better off learning as you go as a solo founder, but most startups can’t afford that time and expense.
In the age of AI, low-code application-building tools, and access to outsourced engineering teams, having a cofounder with technical expertise is far less critical than it was only a few years ago. Many founders are now able to build minimum viable products (MVPs) without any technical skills, and investors are beginning to relax their requirement that nontechnical founders have a cofounder in the CTO role. First Round Capital partner Liz Wessel put it this way: “There are times when I’m OK with a lack of ‘technical chops’ among the founding team—usually when the cofounders have unique or deep domain experience and have shown some ability to work with engineers in the past.” That was the case for two of my former students at HBS, Ilana Borkenstein and Eric Gruskin, who launched their nurse workforce management and scheduling company, M7 Health, in 2022. Borkenstein, who serves as the company’s CEO, was a registered nurse before graduate school, and Gruskin, who serves as COO, had been a management consultant and had worked for many years in the back office of his mother’s clinic. Although neither founder had a technical background, both had deep industry experience. They were able to hire engineers to build their first MVP, expand to 30 hospitals nationwide, and ultimately raise a $4 million seed round in 2024, led by First Round Capital. “We did not hesitate to back this incredible team when we saw what they accomplished leveraging modern tools and hiring engineers to launch their MVP, despite not having a CTO,” said Wessel.

Portrait photographer Gerrard Gethings captures the uncanny resemblances between animals and their human counterparts.
Technology and management skills are not the only expertise you may require at your venture. Nearly a quarter (23%) of the founders I surveyed said they were looking for a cofounder with domain expertise: in markets, such as healthcare and financial services, or in functional areas, such as manufacturing and distribution. Domain expertise informs the product strategy and can help a startup gain credibility in a market. Knowledge of the space can also open doors on the sales side and with investors. Domain experts do not have to be cofounders; they can be first hires or even advisers to your startup—so having gaps in those areas does not necessarily require you to take on a cofounder.
Experience. The mythology about founders is that they are young kids with a lot of grit and few responsibilities or ties that could hold them back from going after something big. The reality is that entrepreneurs like Steve Jobs and Bill Gates (who were 21 and 19, respectively, when they started Apple and Microsoft) are the exceptions. A 2018 study led by Pierre Azoulay of MIT’s Sloan School of Management found that the average age of entrepreneurs when they founded their ventures was 42—and that there appears to be a correlation between founders aged 40 to 49 and successful outcomes as measured by exits (IPOs or acquisitions). Founders with at least three years of experience in the same industry as their startup were 85% more likely to launch a highly successful startup, the study also found. It’s no surprise that founders with experience tend to do better. Whether they got a taste of a great company culture or suffered through a terrible one, or worked at a mature company or a startup that scaled, accumulated experience is invaluable when deciding what to do and what not to do. And with experience often comes maturity and the humility, patience, and resilience to pursue an idea and drive a venture to great heights. So when thinking about whether you want or need a cofounder, consider whether you have that experience and maturity or need to bring on someone who does.
One caveat: Prospective cofounders who are very experienced may not appreciate the amount of low-level work they’ll be expected to do at a startup, such as setting up accounting systems or cloud services for their ventures. “Wantrepreneurs,” as they’re often called, tend to have an idealistic view of what it means to run their own venture or have overly optimistic expectations about payouts that will afford them a new lifestyle or financial security. While aspirations of independence and success are common for most entrepreneurs, they must be coupled with the willingness to roll up their sleeves and slog through the muck and mire of startup life.
If having a cofounder is what you want, be mindful that it takes time to find the right one. Reflecting on her yearlong courtship process, Hively founder Angela Gu said, “Bringing on a cofounder takes patience and a lot of communication. While having a partner can be energizing and motivating, it also requires a significant investment of time and energy to get them up to speed, align on decisions, and invest in the human relationship.”
The question of whether to partner can come up at any point in the startup journey. It may arise early on as you are assessing the problem you want to solve or later when you’ve already gotten traction but may be feeling overwhelmed or are looking to add a certain skill needed for the business. Even if you decide you don’t want a cofounder, investors may push you to find one. In my survey, 50% of founders reported that they had trouble fundraising without a cofounder and were feeling pressure from prospective investors to add one to derisk their venture. That said, investors are becoming open to backing solo founders as long as the first few hires have equity in the venture to ensure commitment, align incentives, and build a strong team that can share the workload.
Wherever you may be in the process, consultants and advisers may be able to fill immediate needs so that you can make progress on your venture. Remember, your first hire doesn’t need to be a cofounder; it’s perfectly fine to hire subordinates, as long as the hierarchy, decision rights, and incentive package (including equity stakes) are clear. Consultants, advisers, and first hires can become cofounders down the road if there is mutual agreement that a partnership makes sense.
Finding the Right Partner
If you decide, after applying the lenses above, that you need and want a cofounder—whether it’s at the inception of your venture or later on—do not rush the process. Finding the right cofounder is not as difficult as finding a life partner, but it’s close. It’s a courtship, and despite the urgency you may feel, it is critical to think carefully about what you want in a cofounder and spend time nurturing prospective relationships. Certainly, patience seems to pay off. Sixty percent of the cofounders I surveyed with successful startups—those that had been operating for more than three years and had raised funding through a series B, the point at which product-market fit has been established and investors expect rapid growth—had spent more than 12 months working together or interacting in other capacities before starting their venture. Approximately 25% of them had been former colleagues or were personal friends, suggesting that prior relationships are conducive to scaling a startup.
Drawing on my experience working with, investing in, and advising startups, I have identified a set of best practices for selecting a cofounder. Even if you had one in a previous startup, the process can still be valuable as you think about the distinctive needs of your current venture.
Conduct a listening tour. Meet with other startup cofounders—people who are not candidates for joining your team but who’ve been through the courtship process. Ask what traits they value most in their partners, what hurdles they had to overcome early in their relationship, and what red flags to be on the lookout for. Even the greatest cofounding teams have war stories about stressful times in their relationships and what they learned from them.

Gerrard Gethings
Describe in writing what you’re looking for in a partner. Using insights from the listening tour, create a job description laying out the experience, expertise, values, and character traits you are seeking in a cofounder. If you already have a strong candidate, it can be tempting to tailor the description to the person you have in mind. Try to stay objective to avoid confirmation bias. Use the job description as your guide as you meet with prospective cofounders, and adjust it as you go. The more prospects you meet, the more you’ll be able to refine the job description.
If you and several others are considering becoming cofounders, create job descriptions for the key roles (CEO, CTO, and so on) using a diverge/converge exercise. In the diverge step, each of you writes job descriptions for the roles independently. Then share all the descriptions (converge) and discuss where you were each coming from. Not only will this help you better define the roles, but it will illuminate the unique perspectives and expectations of each cofounder and set the stage for how the leadership of the business may play out.
As part of this exercise, discuss the roles that each of you will fill. Job titles may not feel important early on, but who holds what role will become increasingly relevant—and possibly contentious—once your venture starts to hire people and raise capital. In some cases, it will be obvious who should fill the various roles (the person with the MBA becomes the CEO; the person with the technical expertise becomes the CTO). Even so, open conversations about each partner’s goals and why a particular title makes sense are critical. They may expose red flags—for example, if a potential cofounder is motivated by ego and wants a title that is not commensurate with his or her experience and expertise.
Finally, try to avoid naming co-CEOs; my experience shows that having two people in the top role often creates confusion for employees and investors about who is the ultimate decision-maker. A co-CEO arrangement can work well, of course: I know of teams who have pulled it off without problems. Just don’t take that route because you’re avoiding a hard conversation about decision rights and responsibilities. That conversation will happen at some point, and the longer you put it off, the harder it will be.
Choose half a dozen people to “date.” As you look for cofounders to fill the gaps in your experience and expertise, you also want to test your chemistry. Yes, this may mean you’re dating more than one person at a time, but ultimately you’ll be more confident about the right fit. People in your network offer a good pool of candidates to start with; Tamaseb’s research found that 45% of unicorn cofounders knew each other from school or had previously worked together. However, just because you were buddies in school or at work does not mean you should skip the cofounder courtship. Building a business with a former colleague or a school friend is like going from dating to living together. You will be sharing responsibilities you most likely did not have in those prior relationships. The stakes are much higher, and your relationship will be tested in new ways.
In your search for candidates, tap into your social network, ask for recommendations from prospective investors, speak with former professors, and so on. Attend conferences, talks, or other industry events, join entrepreneurship affinity groups, and be clear that you are in the market for a cofounder. Share the job description widely. This is not the time to be shy. Put yourself out there!
Test the relationship in various situations. Working with a cofounder is akin to being in a long-term relationship; the average lifespan of a startup is seven to 10 years. You want to make sure that the candidate is emotionally stable and responds well to new situations and stress.
Start by testing the relationship beyond coffee chats and meetings. Engage in activities that force you to make decisions together and allow you to see how the prospective cofounder handles competition or pressure from outside forces. Go on a road trip, try a new activity, play a game of mini golf, or cook a meal together for a group of friends. These experiences can help you evaluate how well you collaborate and whether your styles complement each other. Repeat these tests with each of your candidates. You may find that one prospect gets as stressed out as you do when running late for a meeting, while another stays calm. Which is right for you is completely subjective: Do you want someone who balances out your stress or someone who understands and shares your concerns?
Additionally, test the relationship with real-work situations. More than 75% of the cofounders I surveyed whose startups were active for three or more years had done some form of discovery work together before committing to a partnership. This included building prototypes, interviewing customers, and pitching to prospective investors. It’s one thing to know someone on a personal level and another to see how the person performs in a high-stakes business environment.
Dipish Rai knew he’d found the right cofounder for Termgrid, a software provider for private debt capital markets, when after each interaction with Vishal Singh, he became more energized and excited about their next activity. Rai noted, “Starting a company demands limitless energy to bring an idea to life, making it essential to choose cofounders who enhance your energy rather than drain it.”
During this phase, don’t get too caught up in equity, titles, and such. The goal is to get a sense of how you would work together. By engaging in both personal and professional activities, you can gain a comprehensive understanding of your prospective cofounder’s personality and work style and how well you collaborate under various circumstances. This will inform your decision about whether to pursue the partnership.
Have vulnerable conversations. One of the most popular sessions in my course at Harvard Business School is about people’s relationship with money. Perspectives can vary dramatically and are often rooted in deep family or personal experiences, sometimes dating back to early childhood. How a potential partner feels about money has a direct bearing on key decisions such as how to raise capital, price your product, manage expenses, and pay employees.
It’s also important to talk about seminal experiences in past jobs or school that inform your attitudes about leadership, culture, and how products are designed and built. While these conversations may feel uncomfortable, it’s a step toward building a solid working foundation in what will be a roller coaster of a journey together. And these conversations shouldn’t stop once you agree to be cofounders; they should continue throughout the life of your venture as each cofounder and the relationship mature.
Have a prenuptial (prenup) conversation. Once you are feeling positive about becoming cofounders, craft a cofounder agreement that includes specifics such as roles and responsibilities, how equity is split, vesting schedules, voting rights, and intellectual property ownership. Unfortunately, many cofounding teams dance around this because they don’t want to introduce stress into the budding relationship.
However, not having a prenup can be costly, time-consuming, and emotionally taxing if the relationship doesn’t work out. The cofounders of the car-sharing startup Zipcar, Robin Chase and Antje Danielson, spent almost two years in conflict over roles, responsibilities, and equity ownership in the venture—all topics that had not been fully ironed out as part of the dating and prenup processes. Despite having the original idea for the startup, Danielson was eventually fired by Chase, and just two years after Danielson’s departure, Chase was also fired from the venture by her board. These cofounders’ ownership in the venture became so diluted by subsequent funding rounds that they each got only modest payouts when the company was eventually sold to Avis for just under $500 million.
hbr_ideacast
Podcast Series
HBR IdeaCast
A weekly podcast featuring the leaders in business and management.
Subscribe On:

Apple Podcasts

Google Podcasts

Spotify

RSS

Overcast

RadioPublic
It’s important to come to an agreement up front, because it is difficult to do so once the venture is in flight. What’s more, the prenup conversation often uncovers the goals and character of a potential partner. Just as a couple considering a long-term commitment may discuss whether each party wants to have kids, cofounders should discuss desired outcomes and how they see their roles evolving as the business scales. During one prenup conversation, two cofounders I had been working with had already nailed down titles and responsibilities when they discovered that one wanted to exit fast for a quick return and the other wanted to build a long-term business with IPO potential. That misalignment led to their eventual decision not to move forward together.
Equity splits between cofounders can be a tricky part of a prenup—especially if one person started the venture and then brought a cofounder in later. Equity will vary depending on timing, skills, and experience. For example, even if you’ve already spent a year building a startup on your own, you may still split ownership 50/50 because without a partner with particular domain expertise, the venture will not be able to progress. Sometimes investors will require an unequal split—say, 49% and 51%—to avoid future stalemates at critical decision points. An online equity calculator can help you come up with some numbers, but consider your particular relationship carefully before following what a calculator or your investors tell you to do.
Meet each other’s partners, families, and friends. Not only does this reveal the broader context of each individual’s character, but it also helps the important people in your life understand this new relationship and thus avoid resentment. So when you are up until 2 AM messaging your cofounder about a pitch or how to deal with a customer issue, your spouse or partner is likely to be more understanding.
For those considering a cofounder who is your spouse, a family member, or a close friend, be aware that launching a business together will catapult your relationship to a whole new level—fast. This can be an incredibly rewarding experience, but it can also test a personal relationship to the max. While you are likely to trust each other more than strangers, you may have baggage that creates a lot of emotion and triggers around certain issues. I’ve seen cofounding teams made up of spouses, relatives, or friends be very successful, but I’ve also seen teams erode irreparably because of events rooted in their personal history. It’s very difficult to separate personal issues from your business, so don’t make this choice lightly. Consider getting a coach early on who specializes in working with cofounders with a preexisting personal relationship. Personal tensions will arise, and having support to work through them will be crucial to your long-term success.
After “I Do”
Once you’ve found your ideal partner, the hard work is just beginning. As you dig in, it can be easy to forget to nurture the relationship. Without routine check-ins and alignment discussions, cofounding teams can devolve into resentment and conflict. Not only do the cofounders suffer but tension can spread to team members and raise red flags for investors. Here are a few ways to foster a strong cofounding team:
Set regular cofounder meetings—ideally two sessions a week—to talk about strategy and the direction of the business and to air any concerns about the relationship.
Spend time together outside work at least once a month to deepen your trust and personal connection. This is especially important if you work remotely. The deeper the connection, the easier it will be to handle stressful situations. Respect boundaries to make sure there is clarity around decision-making and to avoid stepping on toes.
Hire a coach to work with you as individuals and together as a cofounding team. It’s much easier to talk through challenges with an expert when things are just simmering than when an issue has come to a full boil.
. . .
Finding the right cofounder is a journey that requires patience, self-awareness, and a structured approach. While cofounders can provide complementary skills, emotional support, and access to capital, they also introduce complexities that will be tricky to navigate. Maintaining transparency, adaptability, and a commitment to nurturing the relationship will be critical to building a resilient and thriving startup.
