The Strengths and Weaknesses that Set Founders Apart
by Samantha Hellauer, Sanja Kos, Julie Vermoote and BJ Wright
October 21, 2024
With his recent essay on “Founder Mode,” Paul Graham, the co-founder of Y Combinator, has ignited a conversation on the differences between founder-led companies and those led by professional managers.
“In effect there are two different ways to run a company: founder mode and manager mode,” Graham wrote. “Till now most people even in Silicon Valley have implicitly assumed that scaling a startup meant switching to manager mode. But we can infer the existence of another mode from the dismay of founders who’ve tried it, and the success of their attempts to escape from it.” He continued:
There are as far as I know no books specifically about founder mode. Business schools don’t know it exists. All we have so far are the experiments of individual founders who’ve been figuring it out for themselves. But now that we know what we’re looking for, we can search for it. I hope in a few years founder mode will be as well understood as manager mode. We can already guess at some of the ways it will differ.
It’s clear that founders are not your typical executives. They’re the alchemists of the business world who turn a spark of an idea into a living, breathing business. But the same entrepreneurial instinct that breeds success can make them less straightforward partners, especially when professional investors enter the picture to scale the business to the next level.
The desire to understand what makes founders tick — and how to harness their special sauce to outperform — is one we’ve heard over and over from investors and board members in recent years.
To deepen our own insights and advise clients, we embarked on a comprehensive study of what we call the “founder DNA.” We analyzed more than 1,400 data points from deep assessments of 50 successful founder CEOs and 58 non-founder CEOs in private equity–backed companies. We also conducted qualitative interviews with dozens of founders, investors, CEO successors, and portfolio talent leaders.
Our research revealed that while no founder CEO is the same, they do exhibit distinctive characteristics as a collective. Founder CEOs are “spikier” than their professional counterparts. Their strengths are more pronounced, but so are their weaknesses. For example, founders often possess extraordinary creativity, vision, and persistence. These traits are not just slightly better than average — they can be exceptional.
On the flip side, their weaknesses are often just as extreme. For instance, their hiring mistakes might be more than just occasional missteps, veering into systemic issues that permeate the organization.
A Founder’s Psychological Blueprint
Our analysis revealed three key areas where successful founders diverge from typical executives:
Cognitive Patterns: Founders think in more divergent, non-linear ways. This fuels their creativity but can also lead to challenges in systematic planning.
Motivational Drivers: Founders’ sense of purpose and persistence are deeply ingrained (often stemming from childhood), driving them to push boundaries that others consider impossible.
Relational Styles: Founders tend to remain closely connected with their trusted inner circles, showing more skepticism toward outsiders, which can inspire fierce loyalty while simultaneously leading to difficulties in professional detachment.
Founder CEOs and non-founder CEOs also showed differences in skill development. The performance of founder CEOs is often tied to innate traits — deep-seated characteristics, such as resilience and self-reliance, that are hard to teach or change — or what we might call their “psychological DNA.” Non-founder CEOs’ success often comes from learned behaviors, acquired skills, and patterns recognized over their career.
Founder CEO Superpowers
The passion, creativity, and deep expertise at the core of a founder’s spark drive innovation in ways that professional managers often cannot replicate. While no two founders are the same, our research identified five statistically significant strengths that distinguish founder CEOs from their non-founder counterparts.
1. They are often creative, innovative thinkers who can articulate a compelling vision.
This quality, found among 36% of founder CEOs in our dataset, is perhaps the most powerful. Founders stand out as particularly strong innovators, seeing possibilities where others see roadblocks. “There’s a difference between an artist and a critic…the founder is the artist who knows how to build from scratch,” explained Peter Bauer, co-founder and former CEO of Mimecast. “They’re not just thinking outside the box; they’re creating entirely new boxes.”
In contrast, our research found that a quarter of non-founder CEOs faced challenges originating new ideas, relying more on execution and past experiences.
2. Most founders embody the company’s culture, fostering a deep sense of duty and followership.
The founder’s vision beats at the heart of any successful founder-led company. Eighty-six percent of founders we studied possessed an ability to inspire through passion, charisma, and loyalty. They can coalesce a diverse group of individuals behind a shared goal, or as Daniel Brenhouse, partner at Permira, articulated, “Founders can carry the entire organization on their shoulders in a unique way.”
Conversely, more than two-thirds of non-founder CEOs struggled to gain broader followership, often due to overextending their teams, pushing too hard too fast.
3. Many lead with “customer obsession.”
Three-quarters of the founder CEOs studied demonstrated a strong aptitude for understanding and building products around their customers, especially given their deep domain and industry expertise. One investor noted, “Founder CEOs have an innate ability to find product-market fit, even in uncharted territories. They have a strong sense of the product and know what the customer wants.”
In contrast, 90% of non-founder CEOs relied on a generalist GM playbook. Deep specialization appeared as a gap for more than a third of them.
4. They live and breathe the business, bringing drive and resilience.
Seventy-six percent of founder CEOs in our dataset exhibited a level of drive and resilience that goes beyond simply working hard. One board member shared, “The benefit of founders is that they are entrepreneurial — they care deeply. They act like owners and work super hard. That’s what they’ve had to do to succeed.”
For non-founder CEOs, their hard-charging desire to deliver, a strength shared among 60% of those in the dataset, stemmed from a history of consistently demonstrating credibility through action-oriented execution.
5. They show raw horsepower and agility, learning through trial and error.
More than half of the founder CEOs in our dataset showcased an exceptional ability to pivot their companies and products as the context shifted, constantly adapting by problem-solving or innovating concepts, technologies, and practices. This ability to pivot the company and product is hard to teach and often propels its growth engine.
Non-founder CEOs, on the other hand, demonstrated less adaptability amidst ambiguity, with 47% overly relying on past playbooks.
Founder CEO Blind Spots
Founders aren’t just running a company — they’re emotionally invested in every decision, every product, and every person. This passion is both their greatest asset and a potential Achilles’ heel, especially when confronted with a new set of expectations from board members or investors. Our research also found five statistically significant weaknesses that distinguish founder CEOs.
1. Many seek high levels of autonomy and control, showing sensitivity to criticism and finding it hard to delegate.
Given that founder CEOs often view the business as an extension of themselves, it can be challenging to release the reins. Many founders in our dataset struggled to delegate, with 58% finding it challenging to release control. This attachment can manifest as volatility under pressure, creating tension with investors and board members who expect a more measured approach.
“Founders are used to being in control and doing everything themselves…they’ve known the business since the beginning and have played many roles and worn multiple hats. That’s not scalable,” one investor shared. “[Non-founder] CEOs have much more emotional distance from the business. It’s hard for the founder to take a step back and trust others will apply the same level of care.”
2. Some founders underinvest in operational governance to scale.
Founders prefer to chase new ideas rather than optimize existing ones, which means the very scrappiness that gets a startup off the ground can hinder its growth. Systems and processes may come less naturally (and be less enjoyable) to founder CEOs.
In contrast, 60% of non-founder CEOs excelled at operational excellence, instilling metrics-driven cultures. Jeff Hastings, founder and CEO-turned-CTO of BrightSign, admitted: “I’ve taken many companies to around $100 million in revenue. After doing startups for a while, I know that at this threshold, I am not as effective…on figuring out where the company should go next. We needed a new CEO who could scale the business.”
3. Many delay upgrading talent and removing underperformers.
Loyalty can be a liability. We found that more than half of the founder CEOs in our study hesitated when dealing with underperformers, often holding onto early employees longer than they should have.
“These are the people who got you from nothing to where you are,” Hastings acknowledged. “You spend so much time with them — more time than you do with your spouse. They are very personal relationships. Whenever I’ve let someone go, I’ve never later wished I’d kept them. I always ask myself, ‘Why didn’t I do this sooner?’”
4. They can be inconsistent in communicating with and aligning key stakeholders.
More than half of the founders we analyzed were weaker at engaging investors and boards; by comparison more than a third of non-founders excelled in this area. “Some founders only tell you about their week and forget about the long-term plan,” one board member shared. “Others only talk about the long-term things and give you tactical progress updates.”
5. They are overly optimistic and may underestimate risk based on prior success.
The optimism that fuels a founder’s vision can blind them to potential pitfalls. Forty-two percent of founders in our study displayed an overly optimistic outlook, potentially underestimating risks based on past successes. On the other hand, 62% of non-founder CEOs studied brought a more pragmatic, risk-conscious approach to planning and execution.
One investor shared, “By definition, founder CEOs have built something from nothing and have been successful at it. This can create positive bias. As a result, they frequently overestimate what is feasible. Other CEOs may not think big enough; they see budgets as way too aggressive, while the founder CEO will say, ‘We can do much more than that.’”
Bridging Founder and Manager Modes
The key to unlocking a company’s full potential lies not in replacing “founder mode” with “manager mode” but in creating synergies between the two. This hybrid approach combines the founder’s special sauce with the operational rigor of professional management.
In the end, the founder’s “spikiness” is likely to be core to a startup’s success. By understanding and embracing the founder’s unique traits and challenges, everyone in the ecosystem — investors, board members, team members, and even the founders themselves — can create an environment where visionary thinking and operational excellence coexist.
About the Research: This article draws on ghSMART’s proprietary database of more than 27,000 C-suite executives, including more than 2,000 CEOs. Our research provides insights from assessments of 50 successful founder CEOs and 58 non-founder CEOs at private equity–backed companies. We analyzed key data points including these leaders’ most notable strengths and gaps, indicators of future potential, and predictors of CEO success (CEO Genome®). Additionally, we researched behavioral patterns, beginning in childhood, and examined their backgrounds, including previous CEO roles, founder experience, private equity involvement, CEO tenure, exits (if applicable), and demographic data. In parallel, we interviewed founder CEOs, non-founder CEOs, private equity investors, board members, and human capital leaders to test our hypotheses and add context to these findings.

--- Document: HBS_article10.txt ---

It’s Time to Reimagine Scale
by Nathan Furr, Susannah Harmon Furr and John Kay
November 22, 2024
Summary. It’s conventional wisdom in business that bigger is better, and that being able to scale is an essential element of a company’s success. But there is a flaw at the heart of the concept of scaling, though it can be hard to articulate. Many of our ideas about scaling rest on foundational economic ideas eloquently espoused by Adam Smith in The Wealth of Nations. The canonical text opens with a description of a pin factory in France to demonstrate the benefits of scaling. Looking at this story from a modern vantage shows important points that Smith — and the generations raised on his ideas — may have missed: that modern work thrives on boundary-crossing and integrative thinking, which create benefits far beyond those ascribed to simple conceptualizations of division of labor and specialization; that there are tradeoffs involved when we mechanize people through specialization; and that there may be other, better metrics to measure success. In light of this, it’s worth also considering other kind of scale: scaling a model, scaling impact, and scaling humanity, rather than growing individual companies.
For some time, scale and scaling — meaning that a business grows to ever-greater size — have been the holy grail of the startup and corporate world. Implicitly many believe that if something doesn’t scale, then it’s a failure. Bigger means better, and not-bigger means failure. For example, we know one entrepreneur who created a popular social network, but because it did not scale to become one of the major social networks, for some time he saw his business as a failure even though it throws off millions in revenue and brings together communities who all enjoy the same game. Likewise, we have written about the experimentation process that led to Rent the Runway, but because this business has inherent limits to scale tied to renting physical assets, some have pushed back on the example because “it didn’t really scale.”
While we all understand the motivation for these questions, somehow, these critiques also feel slightly misplaced. But can we say it out loud? Can we say why getting bigger does not always equal success? Others have done so, including famed economist E.F. Schumacher in his book, Small Is Beautiful. There is a flaw at the heart of the concept of scaling, though it can be hard to articulate in the face of “bigger is better.” Looking back to the roots of “scale” can help us pinpoint what conventional wisdom might be missing.
How We Think About Scale
Many of our ideas about scaling rest on foundational economic ideas eloquently espoused by Adam Smith in The Wealth of Nations, such as the division of labor and specialization. Smith opens this canonical text with a description of a pin factory in France, where he argues that the division of labor has enabled unprecedented efficiency and increased production with scale. In Smith’s example, one worker pulls a wire to create the body of the pin, another worker hammers out the head, and so forth, using division of labor to produce many times more pins than one worker could produce alone. The benefits of the approach are self-evident in the example, and the bigger the factory the better.
But there is a twist to the story — and thus to the foundational economic thinking it makes up — that has important implications: Adam Smith never actually visited the pin factory on which he builds his argument. In fact, Smith only saw an illustration in Denis Diderot’s Encyclopedie. But Diderot also never visited the factory. The essay in Encyclopedie was written by M. Delaire, a philosopher who also did not visit the factory, but rather wrote the article based on an illustration! In essence, one of our most foundational economic principles is based on fourth-hand knowledge, at best.
Given this fact, it’s hard not to wonder whether Adam Smith might have missed something. To find out, my coauthor Susannah Furr, Oxford economist Sir John Kay, and I decided to visit the last pin factory that exists in France — several centuries later, with about the same number of employees as the one about which Smith ambiguously claimed “I have seen a small manufactory of this kind where ten men only were employed.”
Rethinking Scale
The ancient building sits at a low point between two hills, where the river could turn early manufacturing machines, which were later powered by electricity and then themselves replaced by machines with ever-greater automation. Today there are a few workers in the factory, most of them skilled workers maintaining the machinery or performing the many tasks that machines cannot do. What struck us most when looking at the factory is what Smith — and those of us raised on his doctrines and the endless benefits of scale — are the lessons we may have missed about the division of labor.
First, modern work thrives on boundary-crossing and integrative thinking that create benefits far beyond those ascribed to simple conceptualizations of division of labor and specialization. In other words, the machines that populate the factory today were developed to manufacture pins but draw on knowledge from diverse areas, including mechanical engineering, manufacturing operations, heat dynamics, vacuum handling, and dozens of other domains, all of which had to be recombined to create the modern pin factory. Moreover, the most valuable workers in the factory today have broad knowledge of electronics, automation, materials, and other knowledge areas to maintain the machines. Work that is segmented and specialized like that described in the pin factory has been or will be automated by machines or AI. Work that is robust against replacement by automation like AI is differentiated, cross-functional, and integrative.
Second, because Smith never visited the factory, he never thought through the tradeoffs involved when we mechanize people through specialization. Smith’s contemporary, Adam Ferguson, did worry about what happens when we down-skill people and treat them like machines. In his essay, “The History of Civil Society,” he wrote about the downsides: “many parts in the practice of every art, and in the detail of every department, require no abilities, or actually tend to contract and to limit the views of the mind.” Not only do these people lose the very thing that differentiates them from machines — creativity, integrative thinking, etc. — but they make themselves more vulnerable to replacement, and more dissatisfied. In the opening of Studs Terkel’s respected ethnography Working, Terkel states, “This book, being about work, is, by its very nature, about violence — to the spirit as well as to the body.” I had a flashback to a recent taxi ride in San Francisco. As we passed a Waymo self-driving taxi, the driver mumbled, “Well, there’s my replacement.” What happens when a generation of people who have down-skilled to become drivers are replaced?
Third, although scale undoubtedly produces benefits in some circumstances, when do we need to look beyond scale to other metrics of success? Critics of scaling have pointed out that exaggerated returns to scale are often used to bulldoze other valuable outcomes like well-being. As Sir John has pointed out elsewhere about Adam Smith, “There is little evidence that bigger plants produced marked increases in productivity. [Smith’s claims] would not be the last time in which the human diseconomies of scale offset the exaggerated technical economies of scale.”
What are these human diseconomies? As an example, scaling farming has proven efficient, but an increasing number of voices — including those in big agriculture — are warning that it is devastating our long-term health and the future of the planet. Today you need to eat between eight and 21 oranges to get the nutrients your grandparents received in a single orange because soil has been stripped by fertilizer, pesticide, and monocrops of the microbiological community that creates flavor and nutrition. Anyone who has tasted mass-produced strawberries and tomatoes knows firsthand that they often taste like bags of water compared to their more delicate, flavorful cousins raised in good soil. In the pursuit of scale, we have created efficient food that can be shipped long distances but is not delicious. How can we bring these measures into the conversation — not just in food, but across all of business?
Alternatives to Scaling
We recently worked with Blue Hill at Stone Barns, one of the world’s top restaurants, to understand how they are trying to rearchitect the food industry to support life and nutrition in the long run. Their biggest challenge in getting attention in the business world for an approach as audacious as Space X or Tesla? Critics who immediately dismiss it with the question, “Does it scale?” Ironically, one of the challenges Blue Hill faces is to reinvent the food industry to be smaller, rather than bigger. In an ecological community, a system that integrates multiple types of crops, animals, and systems works better with nature and provides more nutrients and long-term viability. So what are the alternatives to our traditional view of scaling? Here is what leaders may want to consider as they think about their reasons for taking a given path.
Scaling a Model, Not a Company
As we have helped Blue Hill wrestle with how to address themselves to a business community that struggles to understand alternatives to one company getting bigger, we’ve asked: Can a “model” scale rather than a single company? In other words, if one develops an idea, or a business model, that influences and changes the world for the better, could that not be as good, or sometimes even better, than a single company scaling to do so? For example, the team at Blue Hill wants to spread new economic models for small farms that are ecologically sound, and are doing this by developing new sources of economic value for small farmers, such as new cuts of steak that increase the value of grass-fed cows, new products like their grain sausage that stretches the use of the animal increasing its value, new processes such as finishing retired dairy cows for use as high-value beef rather than for low-value ground beef, and encouraging the consumption of soil supporting rotational grains like buckwheat.
As they do so, they are not only scaling a model by sharing and dispersing their knowledge — they are laying the foundations of communities that work. Small farms are not only ecologically sound, they also create stronger communities and greater well-being. To date, Blue Hill is finding increasing success — for example, with the spread of a new generation of vegetables bred for flavor that support small farms, encourage crop rotation, and incentivize healthier eating, now being sold at Whole Foods. In this sense, Blue Hill thinks about an idea spreading, rather than scaling in the traditional sense.
Scaling Impact, Rather than a Company
Likewise, we visited the factory of Huit Denim revitalized by entrepreneur David Hieatt. After a successful career in advertising and creating clothing brands, Hieatt moved to the west coast of Wales, which he discovered had once been the jeans manufacturing headquarters of the UK. However, the industry had collapsed as work fled overseas to low-cost locations. Hieatt launched the Do Lectures, an inspirational conference for entrepreneurs, and then Huit Denim, producing high-quality “jeans for life” in a bid to bring employment back to the region.
As their success has grown, many have pushed Hieatt to expand into other product lines. But at a recent conference for “Makers and Mavericks,” Hieatt challenged the assembled group: Can a company scale in other ways than size? For example, in impact? Since this time, Huit Denim has become an advocate for treating employees well, dealing with microplastics, and manufacturing sustainably.
Scaling Humanity, Instead of Scaling Companies
Although leaders often feel pressure to grow, is that always the right path for its employees, and their communities? Some time ago, the famous evolutionary biologist Stewart Kauffman attended a major conference for strategy scholars. He challenged the assembled crowd: “When will you start asking how GDP can serve humanity rather than humanity serving GDP?”
Kauffman’s question haunts us to this day, because he touched on the other dimensions that could be considered in our definitions of scale. What is best for our happiness, for our community, for ecology? What could that world look like? What would it look like if we got it right? As economist R. H. Tawney once wrote, “The existing economic order and too many of the projects advanced for reconstructing it break down through their neglect of the truism that, since even quite common men have souls, no increase in material wealth will compensate them for arrangements which insult their self-respect and impair their freedom.”
If we could broaden the lens of what we consider success and scale, we might be able to create more space for a healthier, happier economy. Sometimes we think that because something happens on its own — Adam Smith’s famous invisible hand — that makes it good. But cancer gets bigger on its own. There are places where scale makes sense, but places where it does not. Perhaps one day we could celebrate a company like Huit Denim changing the conversation or an organization like Blue Hill at Stone Barns scaling a model that creates healthier farms and more delicious food as an equal, maybe even bigger, success than a tech company.

--- Document: HBS_article11.txt ---

4 Pillars of Innovation Every Organization Needs
by Stephen Wunker
September 05, 2024
Innovation doesn’t just come from serendipity. Leaders who nurture great ideas rely on concrete mechanisms to ensure that they see the right ideas, give them breathing room to development, and connect dots throughout their organizations. In any company, the challenge with innovation is seldom the volume of ideas. The challenge lies with having ideas that are related to emerging trends, involve more than the company can do on its own, require nurturing, and are cross-functional in nature. Through interviews with 50 leaders across industries, the author observed patterns of successful innovation repeat across highly distinct settings. Those patterns are what he calls the four pillars of innovation. If you’re struggling to nurture the right ideas, creating these four pillars for innovation can improve the odds that you’ll have high-quality ideas in your pipeline.
A company’s big challenge with innovation is seldom the volume of ideas. Indeed, in a survey conducted this year by my company, only 6% of corporate innovators said that their biggest problem was having too few ideas. But not all ideas are equal, and poor or highly derivative ideas might consume far too much attention. Frequently those ideas are related to emerging trends, involve more than the company can do on its own, require nurturing, and are cross-functional in nature. The real need is to ensure that the right ideas get ahead and get considered.
So what do you do?
During the research for my book The Innovative Leader: Step-by-Step Lessons from Top Innovators for You and Your Organization, four pillars of innovation became apparent. Together with my coauthors, Jennifer Luo Law and Hari Nair, we interviewed 50 leaders across a variety of industries, from tech giants at Google and Microsoft to the CEO of Singapore’s largest bank and the head of an elementary school service. We observed patterns of successful innovation repeating across highly distinct settings.
If you’re struggling to nurture the right ideas, creating these four pillars for innovation can improve the odds that you’ll have high-quality ideas in your pipeline.
Trend Sensing
Companies frequently hop on trends, but many do so only once the trends are well into their lifecycle. That can be costly and risky — market values may already reflect discovery of the trend, and the trend may have peaked. Nestle, for instance, bought the lean diet company Jenny Craig in 2006 for approximately $600 million, after weight loss trends were already starting to move away from Jenny Craig’s focus on fat content due to new discoveries in nutrition science. Nestle then sold the business cheaply seven years later as it divested several underperforming brands.
There are other failure modes for trend sensing, too. Firms can discuss trends in abstract ways — like how the population is aging — without tying them to specific changes in customer needs, supplier capabilities, operational challenges, or competitive pressures. Alternatively, trend sensing may become a soapbox for opinionated individuals to make the industry their inkblot test, asserting big strategic implications from ambiguous signals, such as arguing that the growth of AI means that companies should bring more IT capabilities in-house. That can lead to expensive missteps as companies overpay for assets that may be on-trend but lack other strengths such as competitive differentiation or favorable economics. Witness perhaps the most disastrous merger of all-time: Time Warner’s with AOL during the dot-com bubble.
What to do instead: For a contrast, look at PepsiCo, the multinational food and beverage powerhouse. It held a “Do Us a Flavor” competition for Lay’s potato chips from 2012 to 2018, seeking ideas from consumers for its next flavor. It didn’t actually need new ideas — the company has plenty — but this was an excellent way to track what flavor interests were trending and where. (The first year’s winner: cheesy garlic bread).
Ultimately the program ended in part due to its popularity — going through up to 3.8 million entries a year required a tremendous amount of labor and management time. The contest boasted characteristics of effective trend-sensing programs: It surfaced trends in real-time, was inexpensive, produced specific implications, and was objective. Whether you sponsor a contest, go prospecting at conferences for adjacent industries, talk to your most passionate users, or embrace other methods, these parameters guide effective searches for trends.
Strategic Partnerships
You don’t have to contain yourself to your team or the organization when it comes to innovation. Great innovations can come from collaborations with suppliers, customers, universities, startups, or companies using relevant technology in a totally different way.
For example, the jeans company Levi Strauss has been collaborating with Google to figure out what “smart” clothing might accomplish for users. But doing so needs focused and dedicated work. That means you need to find people within the team to do the long-term work of building those relationships, having speculative conversations, and hunting for partner capabilities that may not be immediately apparent. You don’t want to be Yahoo, which declined to engage with an ambitious early-stage company boasting a different business model: Google.
What to do instead: Put specialists in strategic technology partnerships on the lookout. Have them work in collaboration with core business teams who can use these partnerships to make innovation happen. For example, many pharma companies have these types of partnership offices near MIT, and it’s an approach that can be replicated by a broad range of industries. Johnson & Johnson’s university collaborations not only facilitate investments and research partnerships, but they also provide lab space and support services for promising startups without requiring an equity stake. This can give Johnson & Johnson an inside track with the startup when the timing is ripe. The fruits of the program have been substantial — as of 2023, 840 incubations of companies in this network had yielded more than 290 deals or partnerships with J&J.
Intrapreneur Programs
Where do employees with big ideas go? Often, they make their big ideas small to get approved easily, or they simply leave. History is witness to how Steve Wozniak left HP because it wouldn’t do anything with his design for an early personal computer — the Apple I. In fact, they rejected it five times! Organizations serving the core business day-to-day may hesitate to take the ideas on board because they don’t fit their operating model and may drain resources and take too long to pay off. To fight these challenges, companies need to provide a structured way for idea champions to build out their concepts without over-committing to them before they’re ready.
What to do instead: Foster intrapreneurs — entrepreneurs inside the firm. At Google, where employees may be tempted to depart and form startups, they have the option to compete for funding and the opportunity to work on their concept for six months, with the guarantee they can have their old job back afterward. Management bases its evaluation of the ideas based partly on how many employees elect to work on them. If the venture fails, the people behind it aren’t punished. Gmail is a great example of how google fosters intrapreneurs. When we interviewed Matt Vokoun, VP of Strategy and Business Operations at Google, he told us that it was the one thing that made him believe that Google was serious about innovation.
Innovation Communities
Innovations often happen at intersections, yet many companies lack ways for innovators to connect informally and see where conversations go. This can also make innovation a lonely endeavor. It doesn’t cost much or take a lot of time to provide people with common innovation interests a means to connect and exchange ideas. At the very least, it’ll help keep them motivated. At best, it may trigger new kinds of cross-disciplinary collaborations that open up previously unseen vectors for change. Don’t be Atari, which was abandoned in frustration by another future Apple co-founder: Steve Jobs.
What to do instead: Cultivate community. Take the German life sciences company, Bayer. Bayer has created an internal community of 700 innovators around the world who use common resources, join competitions against one another, and nominate local representatives to participate in an annual meeting. These connections then enable discussions about ways to cross-apply methods, business models, and other capabilities that can translate across business units. For instance, the program helped create agricultural finance options that are now offered around the world, stemming in part from an idea that originated in Bayer’s corporate finance and marketing departments in Greece.
Innovation doesn’t just come from serendipity. The leaders we researched rely on concrete mechanisms to ensure that they see the right ideas, give them breathing room to develop, and look for intersections within the company where innovation can thrive. throughout their organizations. These four pillars can help transform innovation from one-off achievements into consistent capabilities.

--- Document: HBS_article2.txt ---

Research: The Risks of Founding a Startup Near Big Companies
by Jim Bessen, Felix Poege, and Ronja Röttger
November 12, 2024
When startups are deciding where to locate, many consider setting up shop in “tech clusters” that have developed labor markets for the specialized staff that startups need to grow. Yet these areas are dense with talent for a reason: It’s often due to the presence of large firms with whom these fledgling companies must compete. In a new study, researchers found that when large firms increase their hiring, startups in the same location are forced to offer 10% higher salaries, while reducing their expected growth by 36%. While talent-rich communities may be alluring, they can stifle startups ability to scale — a finding which should be incorporated into startups’ landscape analyses.close
Startups often choose to base their fledgling companies in “tech clusters,” seeking to benefit from these areas’ developed labor markets for technical, sales, and managerial staff — typically arising from a significant presence of large firms. Yet while this proximity to talent can provide access to the specialists a startup may need to scale, it also forces these new companies to offer high wages to compete with the offerings of their large firm competitors. Spending large amounts on salaries can leave less capital for other important initiatives, like experimentation or marketing, which can in turn make it harder for startups to reach a growth phase.
So what should startups do? Does the benefit of being close to talent outweigh the financial burden of attracting it away from big firms? And what part do large firms play in this? In new research, we analyzed more than 180 million job ads placed between 2010 and 2020, including ads from more than 140,000 U.S. startups founded in that decade. We found that local large firm hiring patterns have a significant impact on startups’ ability to grow. We examine our findings and offer recommendations for startups looking to navigate this complicated landscape in order to take advantage of resource-rich locations without being crowded out.
When Competition Drives Up Salaries
Startups initially consist of a founder team and a set of early employees that join through informal networks. But once a startup attempts to grow larger, it enters formal labor markets, including by posting job advertisements. In order to explore how large firm hiring affects local startups, we analyzed the online job ads of more than 140,000 U.S. startups founded between 2010 and 2020, and compared them to the more than 180 million ads posted in this timeframe.
We found that when large firms increase their hiring, startups in the same location are forced to offer up to 10% more for crucial roles, while reducing their expected growth by 36%, compared to startups that did not experience a corresponding increase in exposure to large firms. This is true even when controlling for factors such as industry, economic conditions (like recessions or booms), location, startup characteristics, and education and experience requirements. We also found that this “crowding out” effect is particularly pronounced for critical positions like management, STEM, and sales.
The Firms That Pose the Biggest Threats
Intuitively, large firms with very similar business models to startups may appear to be the most dangerous, as they rely on the same specialists and may be more attractive to talented local workers because of larger salaries or benefit offerings. To investigate the impact of similarity on startup growth, we used the business descriptions of large firms and startups to create similarity scores — a high score meant that a firm and startup had more similar businesses, and a low score meant they were relatively dissimilar.
We found that the higher the similarity, the weaker the crowding effects for startups — though they were still present. When startups are similar to surrounding large firms, their growth (in terms of the number of job ads they posted relative to other startups) only diminished by 20%, whereas dissimilar startups saw decreases by up to 60%. This seems to suggest that similarity can offset some of the negative growth impacts that startups may experience when they have to offer higher salaries. This data thus provides evidence that large firms do not create “kill zones” in the labor market for startups interested in pursuing similar aims, even as they still seem to have a negative impact on a startups’ success.
How to Compete in Dense Markets
So how can startups incorporate these findings when making a location decision? We offer some suggestions.
Critically consider the talent your business will require.
For startups considering moves, it is important to incorporate the presence of large firms — including those in other sectors – into a landscape analysis. For startups considering pivots: When possible, take advantage of complementarity to the incumbent’s technology. As our studies found, firms who have very similar businesses may have a smaller negative impact on a startup’s ability to scale.
For potential investors, the same applies in reverse. In an analysis of prospective ventures, financiers should try to understand the labor requirements that scaling will bring, and consider how important potential labor markets are to a company’s success.
When engaged in competition for talent, broaden your horizon.
Startups based in crowded regions still have several ways to avoid head-to-head salary competition with incumbents. They can focus on internal advancement opportunities, emphasizing the chances of individuals to have impact and to develop a strong employer brand. Internal development may be most important for the managerial, STEM, and sales positions that are most affected by crowding, so efforts should be targeted to those, and special economic incentives should be deployed there.
Besides internal advancement, startups should explore alternative ways of talent acquisition, particularly if the formal labor market is clogged, personal networks are exhausted, and headhunters are too expensive. Startups should remain nimble and play to their strengths in terms of allowing remote work to shed the limitation to the local labor market. These can be networks, internship and apprenticeship opportunities, university relationships, and remote workers, both near-shoring and off-shoring. Additionally, startups should increase their openness to employees from non-traditional careers and backgrounds.
Understand regional policymaking.
When choosing a location, startups should consider not only the landscape of firms that are already present, but also the orientation of local policymakers. Some regional policies are poised to provide a better balance between the presence of large firms and the needs of the entrepreneurial community. For example, regional policymakers frequently seek to attract large firms with tax and other incentives, and we show that they face a tradeoff in doing so. Large firms can increase agglomeration economies in a region, but crowding might diminish or even reverse these benefits. Regions that recruit large firms with a specialized focus and have policies that improve employee mobility, such as non-enforcement of employee non-compete agreements, might diminish crowding and provide the most fertile environment for long-run startup success.
Possible Limitations
While our research provides evidence that local large firms can have a stifling impact on startups’ ability to grow, a limitation of this study is that it is generally hard to study or pinpoint spillover impacts. For example, we found that when firms and startups are similar, the crowding out impact is smaller than when firms and startups are dissimilar. We hypothesize that this is because these firms provide spillover benefits in the form of idea generation (entrepreneurial spawning and spinouts, for example), although we did not measure these effects in our study.
Additionally, we measured startup growth by how many jobs they were able to post compared with other startups at similar gestations, but there are many other ways of measuring growth that we did not examine in this study, for example, revenue. That said, our work provides compelling evidence that large firms seem to affect the growth of startups within the same commuting zones.
Startups looking to grow may very well find the talent they need by locating in talent-rich communities. Our research finds, however, that there are significant drawbacks to locating near large firms, as their hiring patterns can have a stifling impact on startups’ ability to scale. When startups must compete for talent by paying higher salaries, it can deplete limited financial resources, making growth in other areas more difficult. Incorporating our findings into any landscape analysis — and seeking new avenues to find employees — may help startups navigate the talent wars to grow successfully.

--- Document: HBS_article3.txt ---

How to Identify the Perfect Cofounder
Not every entrepreneur needs a partner—but if you do, follow this process to find your match. by Julia Austin
Summary. One of the first and most important decisions entrepreneurs make is whether to go it alone or bring on cofounders. Many investors favor startups with multiple founders, believing that a team reduces business risk by diversifying skills, sharing responsibilities, and preventing burnout. But forcing a cofounder relationship can do more harm than good: Research has shown that conflict within the founding team is one of the primary reasons high-potential startups fail. Entrepreneurs should consider bringing on a cofounder if they have unmet needs in three key areas: partnership, expertise, and experience. Finding the right cofounder is not as difficult as finding a life partner, but it’s close. It is critical to think carefully about what you want in a cofounder and spend time nurturing prospective relationships. Key steps in the courtship process include conducting a listening tour, writing a job description, “dating” various candidates, and having a prenuptial conversation.
I’ve spent three decades as a successful, serial startup operator and an investor in entrepreneurial ventures, and I’ve seen firsthand what makes or breaks a cofounding team. I’ve worked for and with hundreds of entrepreneurs, I teach entrepreneurship at Harvard Business School, and I’ve surveyed over 100 founding management teams. My research and experience have revealed that when a great match happens it can be magic—but like any marriage, a cofounder relationship should not be entered into rashly. In this article, I offer guidance to help entrepreneurs decide whether they need a cofounder, and if so, how to go about finding the right one.
Do You Need a Cofounder?
Before embarking on the courtship process, it’s important to first assess whether you need a cofounder at all. There is conflicting data on the correlation between a cofounding team and successful outcomes. For example, research by venture capitalist Ali Tamaseb for his book Super Founders showed that only one in five unicorns are founded by a single person; meanwhile, a Wharton study found that startups with single founders last longer and achieve higher revenue. But overall the data suggests that having a cofounder leads to more financial success.
When deciding whether to bring on a cofounder, you should evaluate whether you have unmet needs in three key areas:
Partnership. Of the founders I surveyed, 83% reported that having a collaborator and a creative partner were their primary drivers for seeking a cofounder. Many entrepreneurs appreciate having someone to brainstorm with, share the workload, and commiserate with during the journey. If those are things you’ve valued in the past, you are likely to benefit from a partnership.
Having cofounders—like being in a committed personal relationship—is a big test of your ability to be vulnerable, handle conflict, and compromise. Cofounding teams must constantly grapple with important issues, from product and hiring decisions to operating procedures and fundraising strategy. Being able to process those decisions together and work through disagreements is essential to a healthy cofounding relationship. Eliza Becton of Bevi, a smart-water-dispenser startup that I was an angel investor in, shared her first-year experience with her cofounder Sean Grundy: “We fought like siblings when we disagreed on product direction or company priorities, but it was always coming from a good-hearted place because we cared so much about each other and our venture.” Becton and Grundy had a willingness to lean into healthy discourse. They were open with each other about the roles they wanted to play at the company, which is critical in a cofounding relationship. “Because our product was my idea at the start, Sean advocated for me to be the CEO of the company,” Becton said. “But it didn’t take long for me to realize that’s not a job I love. I am a product designer and was much happier focusing there. So we agreed he’d take that role.”
If the prospect of hashing out roles and compromising on things like financing or product decisions gives you pause, you may need to do some introspective work before taking on a cofounder, or perhaps go it alone.
Expertise. Self-awareness is critical to forging successful cofounder partnerships. It begins with an honest assessment of your technical and domain expertise. You must know what you don’t know—where you have gaps—and consider how a cofounder’s knowledge may be additive to the venture. A technologist may lack management or operating skills, for instance, and a sales leader may lack technical or strategic skills. Some capabilities can be learned on the job, but early-stage founders often underestimate how long that can take and the extent to which rookie mistakes can set back (or kill) a business when it’s barely out of the gate. If you have lots of time and money, you may be better off learning as you go as a solo founder, but most startups can’t afford that time and expense.
In the age of AI, low-code application-building tools, and access to outsourced engineering teams, having a cofounder with technical expertise is far less critical than it was only a few years ago. Many founders are now able to build minimum viable products (MVPs) without any technical skills, and investors are beginning to relax their requirement that nontechnical founders have a cofounder in the CTO role. First Round Capital partner Liz Wessel put it this way: “There are times when I’m OK with a lack of ‘technical chops’ among the founding team—usually when the cofounders have unique or deep domain experience and have shown some ability to work with engineers in the past.” That was the case for two of my former students at HBS, Ilana Borkenstein and Eric Gruskin, who launched their nurse workforce management and scheduling company, M7 Health, in 2022. Borkenstein, who serves as the company’s CEO, was a registered nurse before graduate school, and Gruskin, who serves as COO, had been a management consultant and had worked for many years in the back office of his mother’s clinic. Although neither founder had a technical background, both had deep industry experience. They were able to hire engineers to build their first MVP, expand to 30 hospitals nationwide, and ultimately raise a $4 million seed round in 2024, led by First Round Capital. “We did not hesitate to back this incredible team when we saw what they accomplished leveraging modern tools and hiring engineers to launch their MVP, despite not having a CTO,” said Wessel.
Portrait photographer Gerrard Gethings captures the uncanny resemblances between animals and their human counterparts.
Technology and management skills are not the only expertise you may require at your venture. Nearly a quarter (23%) of the founders I surveyed said they were looking for a cofounder with domain expertise: in markets, such as healthcare and financial services, or in functional areas, such as manufacturing and distribution. Domain expertise informs the product strategy and can help a startup gain credibility in a market. Knowledge of the space can also open doors on the sales side and with investors. Domain experts do not have to be cofounders; they can be first hires or even advisers to your startup—so having gaps in those areas does not necessarily require you to take on a cofounder.
Experience. The mythology about founders is that they are young kids with a lot of grit and few responsibilities or ties that could hold them back from going after something big. The reality is that entrepreneurs like Steve Jobs and Bill Gates (who were 21 and 19, respectively, when they started Apple and Microsoft) are the exceptions. A 2018 study led by Pierre Azoulay of MIT’s Sloan School of Management found that the average age of entrepreneurs when they founded their ventures was 42—and that there appears to be a correlation between founders aged 40 to 49 and successful outcomes as measured by exits (IPOs or acquisitions). Founders with at least three years of experience in the same industry as their startup were 85% more likely to launch a highly successful startup, the study also found. It’s no surprise that founders with experience tend to do better. Whether they got a taste of a great company culture or suffered through a terrible one, or worked at a mature company or a startup that scaled, accumulated experience is invaluable when deciding what to do and what not to do. And with experience often comes maturity and the humility, patience, and resilience to pursue an idea and drive a venture to great heights. So when thinking about whether you want or need a cofounder, consider whether you have that experience and maturity or need to bring on someone who does.
One caveat: Prospective cofounders who are very experienced may not appreciate the amount of low-level work they’ll be expected to do at a startup, such as setting up accounting systems or cloud services for their ventures. “Wantrepreneurs,” as they’re often called, tend to have an idealistic view of what it means to run their own venture or have overly optimistic expectations about payouts that will afford them a new lifestyle or financial security. While aspirations of independence and success are common for most entrepreneurs, they must be coupled with the willingness to roll up their sleeves and slog through the muck and mire of startup life.
If having a cofounder is what you want, be mindful that it takes time to find the right one. Reflecting on her yearlong courtship process, Hively founder Angela Gu said, “Bringing on a cofounder takes patience and a lot of communication. While having a partner can be energizing and motivating, it also requires a significant investment of time and energy to get them up to speed, align on decisions, and invest in the human relationship.”
The question of whether to partner can come up at any point in the startup journey. It may arise early on as you are assessing the problem you want to solve or later when you’ve already gotten traction but may be feeling overwhelmed or are looking to add a certain skill needed for the business. Even if you decide you don’t want a cofounder, investors may push you to find one. In my survey, 50% of founders reported that they had trouble fundraising without a cofounder and were feeling pressure from prospective investors to add one to derisk their venture. That said, investors are becoming open to backing solo founders as long as the first few hires have equity in the venture to ensure commitment, align incentives, and build a strong team that can share the workload.
Wherever you may be in the process, consultants and advisers may be able to fill immediate needs so that you can make progress on your venture. Remember, your first hire doesn’t need to be a cofounder; it’s perfectly fine to hire subordinates, as long as the hierarchy, decision rights, and incentive package (including equity stakes) are clear. Consultants, advisers, and first hires can become cofounders down the road if there is mutual agreement that a partnership makes sense.
Finding the Right Partner
If you decide, after applying the lenses above, that you need and want a cofounder—whether it’s at the inception of your venture or later on—do not rush the process. Finding the right cofounder is not as difficult as finding a life partner, but it’s close. It’s a courtship, and despite the urgency you may feel, it is critical to think carefully about what you want in a cofounder and spend time nurturing prospective relationships. Certainly, patience seems to pay off. Sixty percent of the cofounders I surveyed with successful startups—those that had been operating for more than three years and had raised funding through a series B, the point at which product-market fit has been established and investors expect rapid growth—had spent more than 12 months working together or interacting in other capacities before starting their venture. Approximately 25% of them had been former colleagues or were personal friends, suggesting that prior relationships are conducive to scaling a startup.
Drawing on my experience working with, investing in, and advising startups, I have identified a set of best practices for selecting a cofounder. Even if you had one in a previous startup, the process can still be valuable as you think about the distinctive needs of your current venture.
Conduct a listening tour. Meet with other startup cofounders—people who are not candidates for joining your team but who’ve been through the courtship process. Ask what traits they value most in their partners, what hurdles they had to overcome early in their relationship, and what red flags to be on the lookout for. Even the greatest cofounding teams have war stories about stressful times in their relationships and what they learned from them.
Gerrard Gethings
Describe in writing what you’re looking for in a partner. Using insights from the listening tour, create a job description laying out the experience, expertise, values, and character traits you are seeking in a cofounder. If you already have a strong candidate, it can be tempting to tailor the description to the person you have in mind. Try to stay objective to avoid confirmation bias. Use the job description as your guide as you meet with prospective cofounders, and adjust it as you go. The more prospects you meet, the more you’ll be able to refine the job description.
If you and several others are considering becoming cofounders, create job descriptions for the key roles (CEO, CTO, and so on) using a diverge/converge exercise. In the diverge step, each of you writes job descriptions for the roles independently. Then share all the descriptions (converge) and discuss where you were each coming from. Not only will this help you better define the roles, but it will illuminate the unique perspectives and expectations of each cofounder and set the stage for how the leadership of the business may play out.
As part of this exercise, discuss the roles that each of you will fill. Job titles may not feel important early on, but who holds what role will become increasingly relevant—and possibly contentious—once your venture starts to hire people and raise capital. In some cases, it will be obvious who should fill the various roles (the person with the MBA becomes the CEO; the person with the technical expertise becomes the CTO). Even so, open conversations about each partner’s goals and why a particular title makes sense are critical. They may expose red flags—for example, if a potential cofounder is motivated by ego and wants a title that is not commensurate with his or her experience and expertise.
Finally, try to avoid naming co-CEOs; my experience shows that having two people in the top role often creates confusion for employees and investors about who is the ultimate decision-maker. A co-CEO arrangement can work well, of course: I know of teams who have pulled it off without problems. Just don’t take that route because you’re avoiding a hard conversation about decision rights and responsibilities. That conversation will happen at some point, and the longer you put it off, the harder it will be.
Choose half a dozen people to “date.” As you look for cofounders to fill the gaps in your experience and expertise, you also want to test your chemistry. Yes, this may mean you’re dating more than one person at a time, but ultimately you’ll be more confident about the right fit. People in your network offer a good pool of candidates to start with; Tamaseb’s research found that 45% of unicorn cofounders knew each other from school or had previously worked together. However, just because you were buddies in school or at work does not mean you should skip the cofounder courtship. Building a business with a former colleague or a school friend is like going from dating to living together. You will be sharing responsibilities you most likely did not have in those prior relationships. The stakes are much higher, and your relationship will be tested in new ways.
In your search for candidates, tap into your social network, ask for recommendations from prospective investors, speak with former professors, and so on. Attend conferences, talks, or other industry events, join entrepreneurship affinity groups, and be clear that you are in the market for a cofounder. Share the job description widely. This is not the time to be shy. Put yourself out there!
Test the relationship in various situations. Working with a cofounder is akin to being in a long-term relationship; the average lifespan of a startup is seven to 10 years. You want to make sure that the candidate is emotionally stable and responds well to new situations and stress.
Start by testing the relationship beyond coffee chats and meetings. Engage in activities that force you to make decisions together and allow you to see how the prospective cofounder handles competition or pressure from outside forces. Go on a road trip, try a new activity, play a game of mini golf, or cook a meal together for a group of friends. These experiences can help you evaluate how well you collaborate and whether your styles complement each other. Repeat these tests with each of your candidates. You may find that one prospect gets as stressed out as you do when running late for a meeting, while another stays calm. Which is right for you is completely subjective: Do you want someone who balances out your stress or someone who understands and shares your concerns?
Additionally, test the relationship with real-work situations. More than 75% of the cofounders I surveyed whose startups were active for three or more years had done some form of discovery work together before committing to a partnership. This included building prototypes, interviewing customers, and pitching to prospective investors. It’s one thing to know someone on a personal level and another to see how the person performs in a high-stakes business environment.
Dipish Rai knew he’d found the right cofounder for Termgrid, a software provider for private debt capital markets, when after each interaction with Vishal Singh, he became more energized and excited about their next activity. Rai noted, “Starting a company demands limitless energy to bring an idea to life, making it essential to choose cofounders who enhance your energy rather than drain it.”
During this phase, don’t get too caught up in equity, titles, and such. The goal is to get a sense of how you would work together. By engaging in both personal and professional activities, you can gain a comprehensive understanding of your prospective cofounder’s personality and work style and how well you collaborate under various circumstances. This will inform your decision about whether to pursue the partnership.
Have vulnerable conversations. One of the most popular sessions in my course at Harvard Business School is about people’s relationship with money. Perspectives can vary dramatically and are often rooted in deep family or personal experiences, sometimes dating back to early childhood. How a potential partner feels about money has a direct bearing on key decisions such as how to raise capital, price your product, manage expenses, and pay employees.
It’s also important to talk about seminal experiences in past jobs or school that inform your attitudes about leadership, culture, and how products are designed and built. While these conversations may feel uncomfortable, it’s a step toward building a solid working foundation in what will be a roller coaster of a journey together. And these conversations shouldn’t stop once you agree to be cofounders; they should continue throughout the life of your venture as each cofounder and the relationship mature.
Have a prenuptial (prenup) conversation. Once you are feeling positive about becoming cofounders, craft a cofounder agreement that includes specifics such as roles and responsibilities, how equity is split, vesting schedules, voting rights, and intellectual property ownership. Unfortunately, many cofounding teams dance around this because they don’t want to introduce stress into the budding relationship.
However, not having a prenup can be costly, time-consuming, and emotionally taxing if the relationship doesn’t work out. The cofounders of the car-sharing startup Zipcar, Robin Chase and Antje Danielson, spent almost two years in conflict over roles, responsibilities, and equity ownership in the venture—all topics that had not been fully ironed out as part of the dating and prenup processes. Despite having the original idea for the startup, Danielson was eventually fired by Chase, and just two years after Danielson’s departure, Chase was also fired from the venture by her board. These cofounders’ ownership in the venture became so diluted by subsequent funding rounds that they each got only modest payouts when the company was eventually sold to Avis for just under $500 million.
hbr_ideacast
Podcast Series
HBR IdeaCast
A weekly podcast featuring the leaders in business and management.
Subscribe On:
Apple Podcasts
Google Podcasts
RadioPublic
It’s important to come to an agreement up front, because it is difficult to do so once the venture is in flight. What’s more, the prenup conversation often uncovers the goals and character of a potential partner. Just as a couple considering a long-term commitment may discuss whether each party wants to have kids, cofounders should discuss desired outcomes and how they see their roles evolving as the business scales. During one prenup conversation, two cofounders I had been working with had already nailed down titles and responsibilities when they discovered that one wanted to exit fast for a quick return and the other wanted to build a long-term business with IPO potential. That misalignment led to their eventual decision not to move forward together.
Equity splits between cofounders can be a tricky part of a prenup—especially if one person started the venture and then brought a cofounder in later. Equity will vary depending on timing, skills, and experience. For example, even if you’ve already spent a year building a startup on your own, you may still split ownership 50/50 because without a partner with particular domain expertise, the venture will not be able to progress. Sometimes investors will require an unequal split—say, 49% and 51%—to avoid future stalemates at critical decision points. An online equity calculator can help you come up with some numbers, but consider your particular relationship carefully before following what a calculator or your investors tell you to do.
Meet each other’s partners, families, and friends. Not only does this reveal the broader context of each individual’s character, but it also helps the important people in your life understand this new relationship and thus avoid resentment. So when you are up until 2 AM messaging your cofounder about a pitch or how to deal with a customer issue, your spouse or partner is likely to be more understanding.
For those considering a cofounder who is your spouse, a family member, or a close friend, be aware that launching a business together will catapult your relationship to a whole new level—fast. This can be an incredibly rewarding experience, but it can also test a personal relationship to the max. While you are likely to trust each other more than strangers, you may have baggage that creates a lot of emotion and triggers around certain issues. I’ve seen cofounding teams made up of spouses, relatives, or friends be very successful, but I’ve also seen teams erode irreparably because of events rooted in their personal history. It’s very difficult to separate personal issues from your business, so don’t make this choice lightly. Consider getting a coach early on who specializes in working with cofounders with a preexisting personal relationship. Personal tensions will arise, and having support to work through them will be crucial to your long-term success.
After “I Do”
Once you’ve found your ideal partner, the hard work is just beginning. As you dig in, it can be easy to forget to nurture the relationship. Without routine check-ins and alignment discussions, cofounding teams can devolve into resentment and conflict. Not only do the cofounders suffer but tension can spread to team members and raise red flags for investors. Here are a few ways to foster a strong cofounding team:
Set regular cofounder meetings—ideally two sessions a week—to talk about strategy and the direction of the business and to air any concerns about the relationship.
Spend time together outside work at least once a month to deepen your trust and personal connection. This is especially important if you work remotely. The deeper the connection, the easier it will be to handle stressful situations. Respect boundaries to make sure there is clarity around decision-making and to avoid stepping on toes.
Hire a coach to work with you as individuals and together as a cofounding team. It’s much easier to talk through challenges with an expert when things are just simmering than when an issue has come to a full boil.
Finding the right cofounder is a journey that requires patience, self-awareness, and a structured approach. While cofounders can provide complementary skills, emotional support, and access to capital, they also introduce complexities that will be tricky to navigate. Maintaining transparency, adaptability, and a commitment to nurturing the relationship will be critical to building a resilient and thriving startup.

--- Document: HBS_article4.txt ---

How to Know When to Pursue Your Side Gig Full-Time
by Eddie Yoon, Christopher Lochhead and Katrina Kirsch
July 11, 2025
Summary. Data show that many people are leaving traditional jobs to pursue side gigs—and that many more aspire to make this leap. One of the things that holds people back is uncertainty about the timing. In our work, we’ve identified five factors to consider. They include potential cash flow, having a recognizable superpower, having the right kinds of capital, excelling at emotional regulation, and showing a deep commitment to the craft.close
The number of full time independent workers in the United States grew from 13.6 million in 2020 to 27.7 million in 2024, according to research by MBO partners. Eighty four percent are happier working on their own, reporting better health and security. Once seen as a risky professional path, forging your own path is something even senior corporate leaders are now pursuing to gain control over their time, their income, and who they want to work with.
So why aren’t more people quitting? Figuring out the right time to make the leap can be one of the most complicated aspects of this choice—and many people get that timing wrong.
One of us (Katrina) quit her job at age 23 and walked away from a six-figure opportunity at a Magnificent Seven tech company to become a solopreneur writer and travel the world. At least that was the plan; instead, she found herself working at Starbucks three months later. From there, she built her network by creating new connections and opportunities—eventually landing contract work with companies like HubSpot, which led to a role at Digital Press working with entrepreneurs, then to startups like M1 Finance, and eventually to Category Pirates.
Another one of us (Eddie) waited until age 43, when he was a senior partner at a consulting firm, to launch a solo gig—long after he had ample financial and professional capital to quit. Looking back, he realizes he could have left years earlier—and the delay probably cost him millions of dollars in potential incremental income and precious family time.
The final author (Christopher) made the leap at age 38 after being chief marketing officer of Mercury Interactive, which had just been acquired by Hewlett Packard for $4.5 billion dollars in 2006. It might have seemed early, but after starting a company at 18, being CMO of three public tech companies, and racking up over four million miles on American Airlines, he was ready for something different.
If you’re pursuing a side hustle that seems to be gaining traction, you’re probably grappling with this question yourself: Is there a way to calculate the right time to quit your day job?
It’s a question we’ve researched, consulted on—and considered deeply before making the leap ourselves. Our business, Category Pirates, has begun offering coursework and publishing a newsletter that focuses on this pivotal decision, and we’re currently in the final stages of writing a book on the topic.
While there is no one-size-fits all answer, our work with executives and leaders who’ve successfully made the leap highlights five questions to determine if you are ready to jump.
Can cash flow from your side hustle sustainably exceed your main hustle?
Ideally you have a sustained track record of doing this, but your side hustle trajectory, pricing power, scalability, and word of mouth can help you make the leap a bit earlier. A strong trajectory can be enough to estimate the potential of your side hustle if you gave it your full attention and time. Your side hustle must have pricing power, which is the most truthful signal of demand. New automation tools like Zapier can help you scale your side hustle without just adding time or labor since how you sell (your business model) matters more than what you sell (your offer). Finally, your side hustle must generate word of mouth in an organic and easily amplifiable way.
Dickie Bush was making $200,000 per year at BlackRock in his mid-twenties. He quit BlackRock 14 months after launching a digital writing business with Nicolas Cole. By that point, it was paying him four times his salary and showed a solid trajectory, with increasing pricing power, ability to scale, and digital word of mouth. Now their business generates more than $6 million dollars in revenue.
Does your superpower generate a 10x outcome?
A 10x outcome is a commonly used benchmark in management consulting; it refers to a client getting a revenue, profit or valuation result directly from your work that is at least ten times more than it costs.
What’s your superpower? Defining this is essential—and not as easy as you think. Hint: it has nothing to do with your title, pedigree, or resume. Your superpower must be a unique ability that’s easily quantified in the marketplace by others.
Holley Miller was the director of global brand for Allergan, the pharmaceutical and medical device company, when she built and executed a category design strategy that quadrupled revenue for a product from $25 million to $100 million in four years. She did it by radically changing their marketing—by reframing and naming a different end user problem instead of just marketing features and technology. As a result, end users and physicians saw Allergan’s offer as a category of one with no substitutes. Revenue quadrupled without adding incremental sales reps or dramatic increases in operating expenses.
Miller realized her ability to frame, name, and claim a radically different strategy in med tech was quite rare and the outcomes she generated were exponentially larger than her mid-six-figure salary. She received confirmation of this when competitors began calling to poach her to their teams. So instead of being an executive, she’s now the founder and president of Grey Matter Marketing with a team of 11 utilizing her superpowers on her own terms designing new categories for companies in life sciences.
Do you have enough capital—and the right kinds?
Money set aside is a great safety net, but you need less than what you think—it costs about $10,000 to $40,000 to actually launch a business, on average—and money alone is insufficient. You need three other types of capital. Reputation capital is a track record of repeatable outcomes for a specific problem and the type of clients you are known for serving. Relationship capital is having three types of people in your corner, including those who can see the upside you overlook, loved ones who won’t lie to you, and fellow creators who love to jam with you. Intellectual capital is knowledge you have converted into an asset others can access, pay you for, and achieve outcomes while you are asleep. This can be books, courses, diagnostics, frameworks, or tools that you can monetize with no time or for an extreme price premium on your time.
Jeff Klimkowski wanted to be an investment banker since the ninth grade and realized his dream at Deutsche Bank for 13 years. But he walked away from seven figures in deferred compensation and a looming promotion to managing director to pursue another dream he had with his friends from elementary school, Dude Wipes.
Dude Wipes is the category king of flushable wipes, which Jeff co-founded with his childhood buddies Sean Riley and Ryan Meegan, the CEO and CMO of Dude Wipes, respectively. They were living together after college and realized that for guys who love beer and burritos, regular toilet paper wasn’t going to cut it. They started this as a side hustle over 10 years ago. Sean and Ryan had 9 to 5 jobs and would pack and ship wipes from 6 PM to midnight. Jeff would provide working capital with his investment banking bonus checks. They scored an investment from Mark Cuban on Shark Tank, who bought 20% of the company.
Humor was their superpower. They were willing to make honest jokes about hygiene via social media that would never make it past conservative marketing departments and nervous legal departments at a Fortune 500 company. Soon after, Dude Wipes was growing fast enough that Jeff had to make a decision. Jeff had a reputation as both entrepreneur and investment banker, massive encouragement and support from his boss, and deep expertise in M&A and capital markets—all qualities that would serve him well as CFO of Dude Wipes. As Sean said, “You can always go back and get another investment banking job.” Dude Wipes did $219 million in retail revenue in 2024 and just recently closed a significant minority investment from a leading consumer private equity firm.
Have you mastered your emotions?
Without emotional regulation, it’s hard to get the economics right. The hardest part of quitting isn’t inconsistent cash flow but the constant self-doubt, imposter syndrome, and loneliness. Your emotions can wreak havoc on your pricing by causing you to undervalue your product or service and offer discounts before a customer even asks.
Nick Bennett teaches other solopreneurs how to make the leap, by providing concrete strategies to scale but also coaching to manage all the negative voices and emotions. When Nick was building his business, he realized that running with others on the same journey was crucial. He built a text thread with three other entrepreneurs that eventually grew to a Slack channel of over 50. While he was successful in his coaching and consulting, he realized the power of community and saw an opportunity to meaningfully raise his price vis-a-vis his time. He and his partner created an offer that generated $30,000 in one weekend.
Does your commitment to your craft and mission exceed your need for kudos and money?
If you’re a writer, you must find joy in becoming a better writer even if your writing goes nowhere. You must be clear about and so committed to your mission that you are willing to walk away from money that doesn’t align with your mission. You must love the problem you solve more so than the solution you offer. This ensures you will have the perseverance to innovate and increase the odds of outcomes for your clients. Love of your craft and mission always leads to greater economic abundance.
Danny Bauer helps school principals achieve massive student and culture outcomes. Adam Frankl helps developer-facing startups rapidly scale and secure their next round of funding. Both had successful solo consulting businesses, but both were so devoted to their craft they kept innovating. Now both run six-figure digital communities full of their people that they can help at scale and serve as a pipeline for their consulting. Danny launched a top-ranked podcast and Adam wrote a best-selling book in his niche.
Based on our work in the space, we expect the number of independent workers to double in a decade. Personal and financial freedom are too appealing, especially as job security at large employers in business and government wanes. The rise of single-person households from 8% in 1940 to 28% in 2020 makes it easier to go independent with less people to provide for. But the pull to create will accelerate this transition. Our data shows 77% of U.S. workers would love to be “paid to create.” Millions will remember how creative they were as children, figure out they can be paid to create as adults–and then make the leap.

--- Document: HBS_article5.txt ---

Precedents Thinking
How to innovate by combining old ideas by Stefanos Zenios and Ken Favaro
Summary. What if “old wine in new bottles” is actually the secret to game-­changing innovation? The authors explore what they call precedents thinking, illustrating how radical breakthroughs such as Henry Ford’s assembly line and Reed Hastings’s Netflix model grew out of creative combinations of existing ideas. They describe the three-step process of precedents thinking: framing the challenge, searching for relevant precedents, and combining them to generate innovative solutions. They demonstrate how this method can drive innovation in both startups and established companies, drawing on the successes of DoorDash and a multinational they call Global Foods, among others
When we teach innovation at the world’s largest companies and in Stanford University’s most popular courses on entrepreneurship, we often start by asking what these four innovations have in common: (1) the moving disassembly lines of Chicago slaughterhouses in the late 1800s; (2) quick-drying nitrocellulose black lacquer used in what is known as “japanning”; (3) staff profit-sharing, introduced by Procter & Gamble’s cofounder William Procter in 1887; and (4) Isaac Singer’s 19th-century network of local dealers selling sewing machines. Even the brightest corporate and startup minds rarely guess the correct answer. When revealed, however, it seems obvious: Henry Ford.
Inspired by the slaughterhouse process, Ford invented the moving assembly line. He adopted japanning to speed up production of the Model T, leading to his famous policy of offering “any color…as long as it’s black.” He introduced profit-sharing to reward speedy assembly workers and help them afford cars of their own. Mimicking Singer’s network of independent dealers, he avoided the expense of employing a widespread sales force. By combining those precedents, Ford transformed his struggling company into a market leader. As he later remarked, “I invented nothing new. I simply assembled the discoveries of other[s].”
Innovation can be daunting. Creating something entirely new feels intimidating. But that feeling misses a vital truth: Most great innovations are creative combinations of existing ideas. Examples abound. Reed Hastings, a cofounder of Netflix, reinvented the movie rental business by combining his local gym’s monthly membership model, Amazon’s online ordering and payment systems, the newly invented DVD format from Japan, and centralized warehousing of digital content. Warren Buffett transformed the failing textile company Berkshire Hathaway into a value-creating powerhouse by connecting three ideas: the “cigar butt” approach to buying businesses (which he learned from his Columbia Business School professor Benjamin Graham, who advised that companies with low valuations may have a few puffs of value left in them, much like a discarded cigar), the intrinsic cash-flow value approach to investing in “great businesses at a fair price” (which Buffett got from his longtime partner, Charlie Munger), and using insurance float—the cash collected from premiums before it has to be used to pay out claims—as a source of “free” capital (which came from Lorimer Davidson, then an investment officer for Geico and later its CEO).Ford, Hastings, and Buffett achieved breakthroughs by creatively combining prior innovations. From our experience helping student-entrepreneurs launch startups and CEOs innovate their strategies, we’ve perfected a method of unlocking this powerful source of innovation: precedents thinking. It involves three steps. First, frame your challenge and its key elements. Next, search for previous innovations—precedents—relevant to each element. Finally, combine some or all of those precedents—in part or in whole—to generate your best ideas. This is what Albert Einstein called “combinatory play.”
In practice each step can be revisited multiple times in light of learning from subsequent steps. You iterate through this process until your intuition tells you that you have a breakthrough that will work.
The Three Steps
Stanford’s entrepreneurship course “Startup Garage” has helped students launch more than 100 startups and attract more than $3 billion dollars’ worth of venture capital. One of those startups was the food-delivery company DoorDash. The four students who became its founding management team had a broad goal of helping small businesses increase their revenue. They followed the three steps of precedents thinking to develop and implement their idea.
Frame. The students began by interviewing 60 small-business owners. In one interview they learned that a bakery in Menlo Park, California, had to turn down 10 to 15 orders a week because the customers wanted delivery but the owner lacked the time to make it. Interviews with restaurant owners revealed the same problem: Other than pizza places and Chinese restaurants, few independent eateries have enough demand to justify building their own infrastructure. That research led the students to define the challenge they wanted to tackle: How can we enable independent restaurants and bakeries to offer their customers an economic and reliable delivery option?
Search. To develop a deeper understanding of that challenge, the members of the DoorDash team took part-time jobs as drivers for Domino’s, which had a long history of offering a well-regarded delivery service. They discovered that a key obstacle for the Domino’s model was extreme variability in demand. On some days drivers would be paid to do nothing because few orders came in; on other days high demand resulted in late deliveries and upset customers.
One advantage of precedents thinking is that it produces big ideas that don’t require a leap into the unknown and thus feel less risky.
Next the students took part-time jobs as FedEx drivers. They soon recognized that FedEx’s optimization of driving routes was critical to delivering packages economically within specified delivery windows. Finally, they read up on Uber, a then-exploding Silicon Valley startup with a transportation model that relied on gig workers and thus could adjust to uneven demand.
What the DoorDash founders learned helped them identify the five elements of the problem they had to solve to reach a workable solution: (1) how to manage variability in demand; (2) how to share a delivery infrastructure and network across independent restaurants and small bakeries; (3) how to seamlessly place and deliver orders; (4) how to keep delivery costs as low as possible; and (5) how to ensure that orders were delivered in a timely fashion. Their research on the relevant precedents—Domino’s, FedEx, and Uber—led them to the next step.
Combine. In this step an innovator takes pieces of past innovations that are pertinent to one or more elements of the overall problem and combines them to comprehensively solve it. The DoorDash team borrowed from the well-developed Domino’s mobile ordering system, which enables customers to conveniently place orders and track their progress. It copied Uber’s model of a driver network that could flex with changing demand. And it adopted FedEx’s route-optimization algorithms for minimizing delivery costs and accurately predicting and quoting delivery times to customers. That led the team to its big idea: a shared delivery infrastructure for restaurants that pooled drivers to adapt to fluctuations in demand and enable affordable just-in-time delivery. Three precedents helped launch a business that’s now worth more than $70 billion.
Not Just for Startups
Precedents thinking is practiced extensively in “Startup Garage.” We’ve also helped companies use it to generate innovative ideas for solving their most important business challenges. For example, the leaders of an enterprise we’ll call Global Foods, which one of us advised, used the method when their biggest and most profitable line of products was being stigmatized for contributing to the obesity epidemic in the United States, Mexico, and many other countries. The CEO called the situation “an existential threat.”
Using search engines, social media, internal small-group sessions, and external networking, the leaders identified 16 precedents that met three important criteria: They were highly relevant to at least one element of the challenge, were more than just a common best practice, and showed strong evidence of success beyond luck.
Only two of the 16 came from the food industry. Ten came from other business areas including agriculture, shoes, clothing, child entertainment, and professional sports. The other four came from outside the business world—for example, the way the Colombian metropolis Medellín reinvigorated its tourism industry after years of being called “the murder capital of the world,” and how Pope Francis changed perceptions of the Catholic Church when it was being stigmatized for its role in child abuse, gay rights, and the treatment of women.
The Bangalore-based photographer Sameer Raichur photographs cars transformed into wedding procession chariots, representing an intersection of old and new.
Playing with a handful of precedents at a time, Global Foods’ leaders produced ideas that led to a corporate transformation they called “volume to value.” It included changes to ingredients and packaging for its product lineup; a new pricing policy to encourage lower-volume, more-moderate servings; a sharper R&D and marketing focus on the functional benefits of its offerings; an increased focus on acquiring more-healthful food products; a more collaborative approach with its most vocal detractors; and a very public commitment to being part of the solution to obesity without accepting blame for causing it.
One of the advantages of precedents thinking, especially for large corporations, is that it produces big ideas that don’t require a leap into the unknown and thus feel less risky. Many of the changes adopted at Global Foods overturned more than a hundred years of corporate orthodoxy. But its leaders found the courage to implement them because the changes were based on successful precedents—and those changes worked. Within a few short years schools and governments backed off, radical detractors went quiet, and acceptance of Global Foods returned. The whole industry was transformed by the emergence of successful healthful-food startups that were subsequently acquired by companies like Global Foods.
Getting the Best Results
Through our work with entrepreneurs and CEOs, we have found four practices that optimize results from precedents thinking regardless of the context.
Find a novel framing of the problem. Most great innovations start with a novel framing. For example, Henry Ford began not with the conventional How can I make more money selling cars? but with How can I make cars more affordable for everyone? That made him unique among his peers, all of whom were more interested in how to make better cars for the 5% of the population that could already afford them.
Likewise, Reed Hastings didn’t frame his challenge around building a better Blockbuster or creating a better way to rent movies, although he managed to do both. It came to him while he was driving to his gym and ruminating on the late-return penalty he had to pay for Apollo 13. He asked himself, How could a movie-rental company operate like a gym? At the time, many people were familiar with Blockbuster’s late fees, Amazon, DVDs, and gym memberships, but it was Hastings’s unique framing that led him to combine them in an innovation that changed the world of entertainment.
A few techniques can help ensure that your framing is as novel as possible. The first is to strive to keep it neutral. That means being agnostic about the solution to the problem. For example, Ford’s focus on making cars affordable for everyone led to reducing the cost of selling them by using franchises, as Singer had done for sewing machines.
Another technique is to keep asking Why? Global Foods’ leaders spent a lot of time wondering why their company had been singled out. They ultimately agreed that the reason was simple: They were the strongest brand in a category whose products were no longer perceived as an acceptable “guilty pleasure.” They soon realized that this was actually an opportunity, because as the category leader, Global Foods could not only alter perceptions of the category but also increase its competitive advantage in the process. Thus the company’s leaders changed their framing from How should we respond to an existential threat to our business? to How can we turn a growing health-related stigma to our advantage?
That was essential to finding the 16 precedents that led to Global Foods’ industry-changing corporate innovation. For example, the Global Foods executives saw how Nike, which had faced significant backlash in the 1990s owing to allegations of overseas labor abuse, had reframed the issue as an opportunity to lead the industry in ethical labor practices. And they considered how Nintendo had turned criticism of gaming’s negative health effects to its advantage by introducing the Nintendo Wii, which featured motion-sensing technology that encouraged vigorous physical activity and was therefore seen as a healthful gaming alternative, boosting Nintendo’s market position and brand value.
A powerful way to find the best precedents is to create an innovation team whose members have as much work-life diversity as possible.
A third technique is allowing the framing to evolve—something that corporate leaders and student entrepreneurs who conceive viable breakthroughs often accomplish. Take LALA, another “Startup Garage” venture. The cofounder Diego Ontaneda’s original idea was to replicate the African Leadership Academy (ALA)—which develops promising teenagers from around Africa at a facility on the outskirts of Johannesburg—in Medellín. Ontaneda framed his challenge as How can I launch a successful high-touch leadership-development program for teenagers in Latin America?
But he soon discovered that Latin American donors were skeptical of the donor-supported, high-fee ALA model. So fees in his model would need to be modest, and the program would have to be much leaner and more decentralized. He reframed the challenge as How can I launch an affordable, scalable, and decentralized lifelong leadership-development program to bring together promising teenagers from across the continent? That led him to add online learning to the precedents and to develop a virtual-learning model with satellites in multiple countries that scaled up quickly and transformed donor skepticism into enthusiasm.
The more novel and evolved your framing, the more likely you are to find an innovative solution to your problem. Perhaps that’s why Einstein claimed, “If I had an hour to solve a problem, I’d spend 55 minutes thinking about the problem and five minutes thinking about solutions.”
Search both near and far for precedents. When applying precedents thinking, inspiration from both within your domain and outside it is essential. Jake Kneller is a cofounder of Sweet Nothings, a “Startup Garage” venture that pioneered the concept of frozen smoothies in grocery stores. He hit a roadblock when trying to sell through national grocery chains because his products were placed in the same section as ice creams, which are not perceived as healthful. To solve that challenge Kneller drew inspiration from Stacy’s Pita Chips, which had managed to get its items placed near hummus rather than with crackers. Kneller’s team worked with grocers to position Sweet Nothings in the frozen fruit section, which led to rapid adoption.
Sweet Nothings’ inspiration came from a nearby precedent, but faraway precedents can be even more powerful. For example, the mathematician Ada Lovelace laid the foundation for modern computing when she recognized that the way looming machines used punch cards to complete textile patterns could be used to specify more-general computational instructions. Likewise, Jorge Odon, an auto mechanic from Argentina, was inspired by a technique for removing a cork from an empty bottle to create the Odon device for easier childbirth. The Pope Francis and Medellín precedents were particularly inspiring to Global Foods’ leaders, and two of the three precedents that inspired DoorDash (FedEx and Uber) had nothing to do with delivering food.
In our experience, the best way to find pertinent out-of-domain innovations is to “disassociate” the elements of your problem such that they are no longer specific to your domain, and to move from asking How? to asking Who? For example, instead of How can we share delivery infrastructure and resources across independent restaurants and small bakeries? ask, Who has shared infrastructure or resources across multiple autonomous entities? Instead of How can we take a leadership position around obesity concerns? ask, Who showed visible leadership for a societal issue they didn’t create?
You’d never recognize those alternative questions as being for a restaurant-delivery startup or a global food company. That’s by design. Disassociation helps you look in other boxes to stimulate more outside-the-box thinking.
Another powerful way to find the best precedents is to create an innovation team whose members have as much work-life diversity as possible. Someone who has had a variety of experiences is far more likely to bring inspiration from outside the problem domain.
Sameer Raichur
We have found that engaging with large language models can accelerate a productive search for precedents, particularly out-of-domain ones. First give the LLM context and background on the challenge you are trying to solve (the more detail, the better). Then enter questions to guide the LLM’s search for precedents, at least two or three for each element of your problem. For example, in a recent workshop on precedents thinking we challenged a group of executives to evaluate how autonomous vehicles will change business models in the auto industry. One of the elements of this challenge was how to persuade skeptical consumers to ride in an autonomous vehicle when they were worried about safety. The executives asked Microsoft Copilot, Who has successfully persuaded consumers to adopt a new technology that was perceived as potentially unsafe? Electric vehicles were included in its response, which was unhelpful. So they modified the prompt to add Please provide additional examples from outside the auto industry. That led Copilot to name microwave ovens, mobile payments, and vaccines. Another modification—Who has successfully persuaded consumers to engage in new ways of doing things that were previously perceived as unsafe?—led to telemedicine.
Foster combinatory play. In our work with both startup and legacy businesses, combinatory play has resulted in innovations that might never have happened otherwise. Indeed, the first two steps of precedents thinking—frame and search—are really just (necessary) preparation for the breakthroughs that come from creative combinations.
We find that combinatory play is best done first individually and then in groups. Reed Hastings himself came up with the idea of putting together gym memberships with online commerce and DVDs to create what became Netflix. The theory of gravity came from the idea of one person—Isaac Newton— to combine Kepler’s work on the movement of heavenly bodies with Galileo’s law of falling bodies. People need private time and space for their minds to make the unexpected connections between precedents that lead to “aha!” moments.
However, combinatory play in groups is also essential to getting the best results from precedents thinking. Individuals can bring something to the table that sparks a great idea from someone else. For example, one of Henry Ford’s employees, William Klann, told Ford about the moving disassembly lines for slaughtering cattle that Ford adapted to auto manufacturing.
There are two keys to fostering combinatory play in groups. The first is to be fully aligned on the challenge you are trying to solve. As Henry Ford said, “Ideas are everywhere. You just have to know what you are looking for.”
The framing DoorDash’s founders chose for their problem didn’t just fall out of a tree and hit them on the head. They spent weeks exploring the challenges that small businesses face before agreeing on what problem they would tackle. Likewise, Global Foods’ leaders invested a lot of time to understand why all the previous effort and money spent to solve its stigma problem had not moved the needle. In the beginning, each leader had a different explanation: being the leader in a category that had lost its consumer acceptance; being an easy target for government; having the wrong marketing, and so on—seven explanations in all. It took the group several weeks to align on how to frame the challenge and on what elements of the problem had to be solved.
For both DoorDash and Global Foods, aligning on the framing of the problem was essential to aiming their combinatory play at the right target. Having multiple versions of a challenge can send people’s creative thinking in very different directions, resulting in a scattergun, conventional, and ultimately ineffectual approach to innovating.
The second key is for every team member to fully internalize every precedent before the team comes together. The leaders of Global Foods filled in a template for each of the 16 precedents they found in their search. The templates had three parts: detailed background on the situation; three to four insights that were relevant to one or more elements of the problem at hand; and evidence of the precedent’s success. Each leader was expected to spend time digesting the information on each precedent over the course of several weeks and to generate at least one creative combination. That proved essential to having every leader primed and ready for combinatory play.
Use precedents thinking to guide execution, too. Precedents thinking is not just for generating big ideas; it’s for bringing them to fruition. Studying relevant precedents in depth and learning from their key implementation tactics can make the difference between success and failure. The experience of Jack McCarthy, a cofounder and the CEO of Gold Leaf Farming, another “Startup Garage” company, is instructive.
Subscribe to our Monthly Newsletter
Strategy & Execution
The tools you need to craft strategic plans — and how to make them happen.
Gold Leaf acquires and operates pistachio and almond farms for private wealth-management firms. Inspired by residential real estate investment trusts (REITs) and search funds (an investment vehicle popular among Stanford MBAs), Gold Leaf started out by acquiring farms for its investors and hiring third parties to manage them. But McCarthy soon discovered that farms managed by third parties did not perform well. He embarked on a systematic search for precedents that would help his company address this challenge and found Lineage, a REIT that acquires and manages cold-storage warehouses. He studied the approach Lineage used to manage its facilities in depth and then developed a strategy for operating the farms in a similar fashion. By bundling some of the innovations Lineage had pioneered with a high-quality recruitment program for farm managers modeled on McKinsey’s hiring practices, Gold Leaf developed its own internal team and operations for managing farms. That turned its model around and helped it attract more capital.
Precedents can also guide the choice of experiments to run when testing the viability of a novel business idea. Their experience with FedEx guided the DoorDash founders. Given the very thin margins in restaurant delivery, their venture’s success relied heavily on completing multiple deliveries per hour. Their first experiments focused on whether the lessons from FedEx could be applied to deliver the minimum number of orders necessary, according to their early economic analyses, to break even. Once they proved that the FedEx precedent was truly applicable to their challenge, they were ready to raise their first significant round of funding, because they could make investors confident that their big idea would work.
Competition to be the first with a great idea is fierce. The key to winning lies in combining old ideas in new ways to solve creatively framed problems. Business leaders and entrepreneurs who are willing to revisit, reshape, and reapply established ideas will unlock value creation in unexpected places. Precedents thinking offers a repeatable, reliable approach to help them do that. And although it can be demanding, the more that leaders and entrepreneurs use it—when refreshing strategies, reinventing business models, developing new products, building novel businesses, and tackling any business challenge—the more innovative they and everyone around them will become.
Read more on Entrepreneurship or related topics Innovation, Start-ups, Business plans, Inventions and Creativity
A version of this article appeared in the March–April 2025 issue of Harvard Business Review.

--- Document: HBS_article6.txt ---

Research: When Does Scientific Decision-Making Benefit Startups?
by Chiara Spina and Elena Novelli
February 24, 2025
Summary. New research on 261 UK start-ups reveals that adopting a scientific approach to decision-making can have different effects depending on the maturity of the business model. Established ventures that used scientific methods to optimize their existing strategies saw immediate performance gains, whereas early-stage start-ups experienced economic performance declines as they questioned and revised fundamental business assumptions. These findings highlight how the impact of scientific decision-making varies based on a firm’s stage of development, with important implications for founders, investors, and business educators on evaluating start-up performance and supporting entrepreneurial growth.
Founders know the mantra: make data-driven decisions. In recent years, the scientific approach to nurturing start-ups—developing hypotheses, collecting evidence that either supports or refutes them, and letting the data guide decisions—has been shown to boost ventures’ performance.
But our new research suggests this approach isn’t universally beneficial. In fact, for early-stage startups still figuring out their core business model, the scientific approach might hurt their economic performance, at least in the short term.
Our finding is based on a field experiment with 261 startups from a range of industries at varying stages of development in the United Kingdom. Our work revealed an interesting dichotomy: Startups with well-defined business models saw immediate gains in performance—measured in terms of revenue—from adopting a scientific approach to decision-making, whereas early-stage ventures experienced performance declines.
The key difference? How evolved their fundamental business model was—and what kind of problems they used the scientific method to help solve.
Who Does the Scientific Method Benefit?
Our study, published in the Strategic Management Journal, used a simple design: We created a business support program that trained all participating entrepreneurs in decision-making frameworks, such as the business model canvas, and skills, including how to conduct A/B testing. In addition to these trainings, half of the participants were also taught and encouraged to use a scientific approach for making decisions. We also asked participants about their firm’s strategic vision and how likely their firm was to make a radical change. This helped us determine how mature a startup’s business model was. Those firms with well-articulated strategies resistant to major changes were considered mature, while those with flexible models were considered early-stage.
Following the trainings, we conducted regular interviews with participants to gauge their use of the scientific method and we collected data on each firms’ revenue for nine months. We found a relationship between firm maturity and the kinds of problems the scientific method was being applied to: Mature startups that adopted scientific decision-making used it to optimize and fine-tune their existing strategies, while less developed startups applied this methodology to help answer more existential questions.
For example, one founder of a mature company that sold memory cards, among other items, explained that they used the scientific approach to refine their theory of what kinds of product descriptions would convert more shoppers into customers. “We started advertising our products as…memory solutions for those specific devices,” the founder told us. “Once we had these different listings… we [found this to be] the best method.”
This focused experimentation led to higher performance—the company increased their profits by 10% after changing their approach to product listings.
In contrast, early-stage founders were more likely to apply scientific methods to problems that forced them to question their fundamental assumptions. “Before coming into the program, we had a very clear vision,” said one participant. “But as we’ve rigorously tested our hypotheses and ideas, we’re less clear on which pain points we’re reducing for users. So that’s the thing we’re [now] trying to ensure.”
This deeper exploration often led to major strategic pivots that stalled growth while founders reassessed their entire business models.
Taking the Long View
A limitation of our study was that it only measured revenue growth for a nine-month window. While we found that early-stage startups saw revenue hits after applying the scientific method to decision-making, the majority of the early-stage founders we spoke with described this period of experimentation positively, noting that they believed the methodology had helped them refine their vision and would drive long-term growth.
As one early-stage founder who took a scientific approach reflected, “We’ve stepped back… it is needed to improve ourselves and then come out better.”
Another said they were ”looking longer term and thinking how we can actually turn that into a more viable business.”
We hypothesize that the initial phase of uncertainty, while challenging for metrics-focused founders and investors in the short run, may help drive long-term success. By thoroughly examining assumptions before making major strategic commitments, early-stage startups can avoid the kinds of mistakes which may lead to short-term profit growth, but result in unstable long-term models. The scientific method can therefore be an important tool that gives early startups a chance to rigorously test the long-term viability of their business models—even while knowing that it may lead to some temporary performance dips in terms of revenue.
Practical Implications
We recommend that entrepreneurs—and investors—consider startups’ development stage before adopting highly systematic approaches. While we believe the scientific model is beneficial along a startup’s development arc, how that success is evaluated may need to change depending on a firm’s maturity.
Early-stage startup founders
The key is to embrace uncertainty as a natural element of the scientific approach during initial stages. Leaders should anticipate and prepare for potential short-term performance dips while they explore fundamental assumptions. The focus should be on developing a comprehensive “theory of value” before diving into metric optimization. It’s crucial to set appropriate expectations with stakeholders about this exploratory phase, as trying to rush through it may put the business on an avoidable path that ultimately leads to failure.
Established startup founders
Success comes from applying scientific methods to optimize within your established business model. This involves implementing systematic testing across product features, marketing approaches, and customer service initiatives, while carefully tracking and measuring the impact of these incremental improvements.
It’s essential to adjust performance expectations based on the maturity of a startup’s business model. They should place value on thorough strategic exploration in early stages, even when it temporarily impacts growth metrics. Rather than focusing solely on quick wins, investors should look for signs of thoughtful, systematic learning within the organization.
The key lesson isn’t that scientific decision-making is good or bad for certain firms—it’s that timing and context matter. Early-stage start-ups need room to explore and question fundamental assumptions, even if that creates temporary uncertainty. More established start-ups can use scientific methods to optimize within their existing frameworks, leading to quick performance gains.
Successful founders must understand this distinction and adapt their decision-making approach accordingly, knowing to step back and reassess fundamentals, and when to apply rigorous testing to optimize what’s working. In the end, scientific decision-making is like any other tool—its effect on performance depends not just on using it, but what you use it for.

--- Document: HBS_article7.txt ---

6 Lessons for Startups from a Museum Dedicated to Failure
by Sean Jacobsohn
January 31, 2025
Summary. Recent data shows that U.S. startup failures have increased by 60% in the past year. And every failed product or company carries a price: wasted resources, lost jobs, tarnished reputations. To understand more about risk-taking and failure, Sean Jacobsohn has catalogued more than 1,000 failed products and businesses in a collection he calls the Failure Museum. He has identified six warning signs of failure, and offers lessons to ensure entrepreneurs learn from these mistakes.close
Founders work hard to build their startups. Venture capitalists work hard to identify and invest in the most promising ones. But the harsh reality is that failure is inevitable. Recent data shows that U.S. startup failures have increased by 60% in the past year.
Numerous factors can kill a company or product. To understand more about risk-taking and failure, I’ve collected and cataloged artifacts from more than 1,000 failed products and businesses, things like Pets.com sock puppets, unopened cans of New Coke, and a pair of Google Glasses. I call my collection the Failure Museum.
In studying my collection, I realized nearly all of the failures represented fall within six categories that I call the six forces of failure. I strongly encourage founders and executives to look for these warning signs before any one of them spells catastrophe for their businesses.
The Six Forces of Failure
1. Poor product-market fit
In the end, all failed products have a common denominator: Too few customers find a compelling reason to buy. Maybe it’s the price. Maybe it’s the features. Maybe it’s because the product is a nice-to-have instead of a must-have. Or maybe it’s just not a product people expect from that company.
Harley Davidson has a well-earned reputation in its core business of motorcycles. But when they introduced a cologne, entering a highly competitive market dominated by top designer brands such as Armani, Calvin Klein, and Versace, the product flopped. Ill-conceived product forays from Burger King (another cologne) and Cheetos (lip balm and eyeshadow) suffered the same fate.
A company can encounter serious trouble if it invests heavily in manufacturing, distribution, marketing, and sales before it has established the likelihood of a strong bond between potential buyers and the product’s value proposition. There’s an adage for this: a solution in search of a problem.
2. Financial mismanagement
Most companies fail for a simple reason: They run out of money. Too much debt, lax spending controls, high customer-acquisition costs, or over-dependence on a single revenue stream or customer — these are just a few of the red flags that a business could run out of runway before it can take off.
Webvan, an early web-based grocery delivery service, launched in 10 cities and raised $757 million before proving success in even one market. The business model — which centered on owning and operating their own distribution centers and hiring their own drivers — required all that capital just to get the company up and running.
Home goods retailer Bed Bath & Beyond was a juggernaut with more than 1,500 stores as recently as 2018. But instead of using cash flow to invest in the business, the company spent $11.8 billion on its own shares since 2004, eventually leading to bankruptcy in 2023.
In some cases, the cost of acquiring and supporting a customer is so high that the lifetime value of that buyer can’t compensate for it. And companies that rely on acquisitions to add product lines or market segments often pay too much and receive too little in return. For example, computer maker Compaq bought Digital Equipment Corp (DEC) in 1998 — the largest computer industry merger ever at that time. Compaq wanted to grow its global footprint by acquiring DEC’s overseas presence. The two companies never fully integrated, and Compaq eventually was acquired by HP in 2002 after struggling financially.
3. Neglecting customer success
Strong brands are built when companies deliver a positive customer experience. Failure to understand what constitutes success in customers’ minds can undercut the company’s goal of long-term customer satisfaction. Any number of things can turn off even loyal customers: inadequate features, bad quality, weak customer support, and perceptions of bad value for the money.
Apple’s Newton was a pioneer in the market for handheld computing devices, and many of its features — such as handwriting recognition and calendar management — were revolutionary for a mobile device in 1993. But the company rushed it to market, and its ability to accurately capture what the user was writing fell far short of expectations. Its shortcomings made it a laughingstock, most notably in the Doonesbury comic strip and The Simpsons. Customers were used to paying a premium for Apple products, but the Newton didn’t deliver anticipated value.
Another feature-heavy device, Samsung’s pricey Galaxy Note 7, earned praise for its construction quality, HDR support, and slick user interface when it hit the market in 2016. However, within a year of its release, 2.5 million Note 7 phones were recalled after customers reported that their batteries were overheating and even exploding.
4. Overwhelming competition
No matter how innovative an organization may be, every company or product has competition. How you deal with it is critical. Trying to win over a competitor’s loyal customer base is a daunting challenge. But the knife also cuts the other way: A self-satisfied incumbent can fail to keep pace with innovators and lose a market it once dominated, especially in technology-intensive sectors.
What’s disruptive today can be outdated tomorrow. And threats can come from multiple directions, such as a competitor moving up or down market or an especially litigious opponent who drains your resources. (Businesses that are highly leveraged on intellectual property are especially vulnerable to this threat.)
Consider Myspace. For a time, it defined social media, briefly becoming the most-visited website in the United States at its peak in 2006. But it failed to innovate, didn’t track its young users’ rapidly changing habits, and quickly fell behind Facebook, a gap it never could make up. And GM, the largest U.S. automaker, sank more than $10 billion into its robotaxi service, Cruise. When Cruise launched in 2016, robotaxi development was a top priority for the company. However, Cruise couldn’t keep up with competitors such as Waymo and Tesla, and safety incidents involving Cruise’s fleet repeatedly put the company at odds with regulators. GM eventually shut down the robotaxi development unit in 2024, pulling the plug on its money-losing Cruise business.
5. Bad timing
Unanticipated changes in macroeconomics, technology, world affairs, or market dynamics can deal a fatal blow to products and the companies that make them. New taxes or tariffs can torpedo financial projections and customer acceptance. And adoption of new technology can be painfully slow if it requires a supportive physical infrastructure or a large ecosystem of partners.
But sometimes bad timing — entering a market too early or too late — can be a self-inflicted wound. Catching the wave of a hot market can make raising capital easy, but once the crest breaks, that next round of funding can be a slog.
Yet another instance where success in one market doesn’t ensure a winning formula elsewhere is the Amazon Fire phone. Rumors abounded for years that Amazon was developing a phone, so anticipation was high when it was introduced in June 2014. Despite several technological innovations and a competitive price, its introduction came seven years after the launch of the iPhone and six years after the initial Android phone. Not surprisingly, Amazon’s device never caught up and was discontinued after a year.
In one sense, the timing of British virtual-events startup Hopin could not have been better. Founded the year before the Covid-19 pandemic, adoption of Hopin’s platform exploded as travel restrictions and distancing requirements made in-person events unfeasible. After a peak valuation of $7.8 billion in 2021, demand dropped as people returned to live events. Hopin went through three rounds of layoffs before selling the core business to RingCentral for $15 million in 2023.
6. A weak leadership team
Recruiting, retaining, and motivating talent is a never-ending task, not to mention the challenge of blending individuals into a cohesive and effective team. Dysfunction at the top can quickly infect the entire organization, draining morale.
Theranos and Enron are prime examples of weak, unethical executive teams leading their companies to infamous ends. Enron hid mountains of debt and toxic assets from regulators and investors, while Theranos put patients’ health in jeopardy and also deceived its investors. In both cases, the leadership’s unchecked practices were a failure of the party in charge of their governance and oversight, their board of directors.
Of course, both companies could be examples of a seventh force: outright fraud, but it is so hard to spot at the outset. Think Bernie Madoff.
Applying the Lessons of Failure
What can entrepreneurs do to avoid — or at least learn from — failures?
1. Focus on business fundamentals.
It’s been a tough couple of years for startups, and funding has sometimes been scarce. Therefore, it’s essential to be capital efficient. Companies should not go to market without a clear product-market fit.
Take the ESPN mobile phone, which was launched and discontinued in 2006. It showed only sports scores and ESPN content. That made it a nice-to-have item, not a must-have, even for the most diehard sports fan.
2. Build a world-class team.
Founders should surround themselves with a strong, experienced, and engaged management team, board, and investors. In the case of WeWork, the board failed to spot a culture of excess, and it didn’t enforce financial discipline.
3. Keep customer success your #1 priority.
No matter what the industry, a young company’s success heavily depends on a high level of satisfaction from early customers. Pick early customers who are representative of the bigger market you are trying to serve and always solicit and heed their feedback.
Management at electric car maker Fisker would have done well to listen to early owners, who were frustrated when frequent problems with software and parts led to constant and complicated repairs.
4. Stay open-minded and nimble.
Even the most successful companies have had to pivot at least once. It’s essential to remain open-minded and nimble in the face of change and challenges.
A textbook example of a company that failed to pivot was Blockbuster, which at one point had more than 9,000 stores and owned the movie-rental market. After passing up an opportunity to buy a young upstart called Netflix, it eventually succumbed to the market’s transition to streaming entertainment and filed for bankruptcy in 2010.
The Value of Failure
Scrolling through exhibits in the Failure Museum may make you chuckle. But this is serious business. Every failed product or company carries a price: wasted resources, lost jobs, tarnished reputations.
But remember that failure can be healthy. Few companies of note can claim to never have experienced failure. In fact, the absence of failures could indicate a lack of creativity and conviction, or a fear of taking risks.
Applying the lessons from past failures can help build an enduring company. Just be aware of the forces that might undermine your venture.

--- Document: HBS_article8.txt ---

How Founders Can Avoid the Deception Trap
by Raghu Garud, Yuliya Snihur, Llewellyn D.W. Thomas and Nelson Phillips
January 8, 2025
Summary. Entrepreneurs walk a razor-thin line between telling compelling stories and peddling lies — a misstep can easily lead to slipping into what the authors call the “deception trap.” It starts when entrepreneurs, through their storytelling and framing, establish their identities, promote their visions, and set expectations for themselves and their stakeholders. Yet, framing the future can easily turn into a vicious cycle of expanding deceit if expectations cannot be met and entrepreneurs attempt to deliver at all costs. Entrepreneurs should take a few steps to protect themselves: 1) set realistic stretch goals and keep stakeholders informed of the risks, 2) understand the “fail” in “fail fast” as rapid experimentation to identify promising alternatives, not a license to take poorly conceived risks, and 3) be realistic when creating early prototypes and reporting on milestones.
There is an increasingly familiar story in the tech world: After a meteoric rise, a dazzling young wunderkind is disgraced when it’s revealed that their world-changing innovation is held together by promises and deceit. Recently, it was Sam Bankman-Fried, found guilty of seven counts of fraud. But a downfall like Bankman-Fried’s is all too familiar, as is the hubris, ambition, greed, and persuasive (but ultimately deceptive) storytelling that preceded it. What is, perhaps, most notable about this story is how unremarkable it is.
Entrepreneurs walk a razor-thin line between telling compelling stories and peddling lies — a misstep can easily lead to slipping into what we call the “deception trap.” This insight is based on our ongoing multi-year study about the dark side of entrepreneurship. Our collective expertise on entrepreneurial framing, scaling, hype and deception shows that the deception trap is ever present for entrepreneurs.
The deception trap is a problematic cycle of interactions between entrepreneurs and their stakeholders. It starts when entrepreneurs, through their storytelling and framing, establish their identities, promote their visions, and set expectations for themselves and their stakeholders. Yet, framing the future can easily turn into a vicious cycle of expanding deceit if expectations cannot be met and entrepreneurs attempt to deliver at all costs.
Ironically, this trap emerges because of entrepreneurs’ strong instinct to succeed. In the case of another entrepreneur recently convicted of fraud — Carlos Watson of Ozy Media — prosecutors argued, “he was determined to turn Ozy and himself into the next big thing, and he wasn’t going to let the truth stand in his way.”
The Slippery Slope of Deception
Entrepreneurs in the early stages of a startup must convey their future vision and an ability to see it through to potential customers, partners, and investors. This is especially true in tech, where so much of the innovation is uncertain, with many product features still untested, business models ill-defined, and customer adoption still murky. As a result, founders frame their venture’s future in abstract and aspirational ways, pitching it as “the Amazon-of-X” or “Uber-but-for-Y” illustrating their ambition rather than concrete capabilities early on. In doing so, they are pitching not only their ventures but also themselves, for example, Bankman-Fried’s embodiment of scruff or Theranos founder Elizabeth Holmes’ feigned baritone. Celebrity endorsements and investments, as well as partnerships with established companies also contribute to the apparent legitimacy of entrepreneurs and their ventures. Indeed, a powerfully framed story can help audiences make sense of what may initially seem fantastical.
However, these make-or-break first impressions can lay the seeds of later challenges, when entrepreneurs first begin to flirt with deceit by embellishing reality or simply promising too much. The first step towards the deception trap is often taken when unmet expectations cause investors, business partners, customers, and regulators to raise eyebrows and ask tough questions. At this point, entrepreneurs can no longer resort to vagueness, discuss abstract ideas, or bank on charm. Instead, they may be tempted to blur the truth, moving into embellishments, misrepresentation, and flagrant lies as they are asked to show concrete results.
Desperation to meet expectations can also lead to doubling down on lies and the adoption of unrealistic stretch goals, with ever bigger promises to obscure the original lie and maintain enthusiasm among supporters. As ventures come under increasing scrutiny, employees become complicit, often staying silent for fear of reprimand, lawsuits, or because they have substantial personal investment in the venture.
This is where stakeholders come into the picture. Indeed, the deception trap is as much about encouragement from stakeholders such as partners, investors, or board members as it is about the behavior of entrepreneurs. A culture of encouraging entrepreneurs to be ambitious adds impetus to the natural tendency of entrepreneurs to be bold, but also runs the risk of pushing entrepreneurs into the deception trap.
How exactly do stakeholders participate in the process? After stakeholders have invested time, money and effort in the venture, they want to see returns and so may disregard issues, which, if made public, could diminish the value of their investments. For others, their reputation is at stake, especially if their involvement with the venture is widely known.
While some stakeholders may not be aware of deception, others may encourage entrepreneurs to “fake it till they make it,” and, in doing so, encourage entrepreneurs deeper into falsehoods. Only when the deception bubble bursts and entrepreneurs publicly fail to deliver do stakeholders reconsider their ethical stance; for instance, by retrospectively condemning the entrepreneurs for cheating throughout the journey even when they may have encouraged such behavior earlier. This was the case with Theranos and its founder Elizabeth Holmes, who was roundly vilified by leading names in tech as an exception and outsider after her fall from grace — even as her trial revealed her to be deeply embedded in Silicon Valley’s culture. Ironically, if entrepreneurs are successful, then they are hailed as heroes even if deception is known to have fueled the process; that is, all is forgiven in a “fake it till you make it” culture.
Avoiding the Deception Trap for Entrepreneurs
Our extensive study of this phenomenon reveals that even those who do not want to fall into the deception trap may find themselves slipping into it. Entrepreneurs, to the extent they realize such possibilities up front, may like to take some precautionary steps.
First, it is important to set realistic stretch goals and keep stakeholders informed of the risks and practicalities of scaling up. Downplaying challenges is just a step away from the escalation of commitments to failing courses of action involving embellishments and complete fabrications. JPMorgan Chase learned this when they uncovered that 72% of 4.2 million customer emails were faked by the founder Charlie Javice when she sold her student loan startup Frank to them. (Javice has pleaded not guilty to fraud charges and her trial is scheduled for February 2025.)
Second, a more nuanced understanding of “fail” in “fail fast” is required. Entrepreneurs all too often construe it as a license to take poorly conceived risks and design bad experiments, which can lead to expensive failures. Subsequently, entrepreneurs hide such flops based on outlandish assumptions and duplicitous justifications, which can then lead to embellishments and fabrications. This is even more likely when “fail fast” is part of a culture that also advocates “fake it until you make it.”
It is best to understand the “fail” in “fail fast” as rapid experimentation to identify promising alternatives. But such experimentation must be undertaken in a disciplined fashion, based on well-thought-out hypotheses and assumptions, rigorous experimental techniques (such as A/B testing), transparent reporting of the results, and subsequent decisions about product rollouts. In other words, there is a difference between fast-and-loose faking and failing and evidence-based disciplined learning from experimentation.
Third, and equally important, is to be realistic when creating early prototypes and reporting on milestones. While it may be easy to build many features into a prototype, it can be difficult not to slide into creating vaporware — announcing features that do not exist or may prove too expensive to release at scale. Indeed, prototypes that demonstrate proof-of-concept can all too easily become the source of deception and fabrication when rushed into the market without appropriate qualifications to meet expectations set earlier. Illustrations include Theranos’s prototype, the Edison machine, which served as the basis for an ill-fated partnership with Walgreens and Safeway to deliver its blood tests to the masses, and Nikola’s electric Badger truck that ended up in court due to the founder’s misleading claims about the underlying technology.
How Stakeholders Can Preempt the Deception Trap
So long as “fake it till you make it” remains a prevailing attitude in entrepreneurship, and stakeholders expect entrepreneurs to meet exaggerated projections in the face of fundamental uncertainty — even when on failing trajectories — the deception trap will continue to snare even well-meaning entrepreneurs. Consequently, stakeholder involvement to preempt the deception trap is also key.
First, independent due diligence and an ongoing awareness of what the entrepreneur is up to are essential. This did not happen in the case of Theranos. For example, Alan Eisenman, a Theranos investor, noted that he learned about the venture through a close friend, a financial adviser to Ms. Holmes’s family. As reported in a Wall Street Journal article covering the trial, Mr. Eisenman said that a few of the Theranos founder’s statements impressed him, including “that Oracle Corp. cofounder Larry Ellison was an investor and board member” and that “Theranos had contracts with a handful of large pharmaceutical companies, including Pfizer Inc., which he said put an initial stamp of approval on this investment.”
Second, as this Theranos example illustrates, stepping back to reflect is vital for stakeholders. Rather than operate on the assumption that earlier stakeholders have already researched the start-up, it is beneficial for new stakeholders to carry out their own analyses. Celebrity endorsement could be due to excessive hype rather than because a real opportunity exists.
Third, remaining aware of the uncertainty associated with entrepreneurial endeavors is also important. In this regard, stakeholders may not gain access to the information they need from entrepreneurs, such as technology specifications or customer lists that might be kept secret. When entrepreneurs make unreasonable claims of secrecy, stakeholders have the right to become suspicious when tangible data about the core facets of the venture are not forthcoming. Under these circumstances, they must insist on evidence from the entrepreneurs. For instance, they can demand to see prototypes working in the field with the help of independent expert opinions (particularly important for high or deep tech).
Fourth, keeping an eye out for deception is even more necessary when an entrepreneurial opportunity is hyped; that is, when expectations about the venture, technology, or market are collectively inflated. For instance, some experienced investors acknowledged that they wrote checks to Theranos on the basis that it was “driving the future of medicine” without seeing financial statements or doing much to verify its technology and promises and despite their doubts about the company’s claims.
Fifth, for stakeholders, it is key to follow the motto “trust but verify.” They must avail themselves of common-sense tests of startup claims, such as the size of the market vs. claimed number of customers, the monetization possibilities for the adopted business model, and realistic adoption rates and acquisition costs.
Overall, stakeholders need to stay alert across the whole entrepreneurial journey for signs of entrepreneurial moral disengagement and clarify for themselves why they continue supporting the entrepreneur even as warning signs mount. By keeping multiple information channels open, actively seeking all data points, insisting on periodic pacing of proof points (e.g., tracking real progress on relevant metrics during board meetings), and paying attention to whistle blowers when they suspect something is afoul, stakeholders can help entrepreneurs avoid the deception trap.
System Overhaul?
There is no doubt that entrepreneurship can transform industries and societies. But there is a dark side to entrepreneurship where even well-intentioned entrepreneurs can fall victim to the deception trap, with stakeholders knowingly or even unwittingly contributing to the process by adding to the hype in the name of hope.
Consequently, the much-lauded entrepreneurial culture of overambition needs an overhaul. Building a better entrepreneurial culture is a job for everyone. Entrepreneurs, investors, business partners, and employees must all stay alert, perform due diligence and not get swept away with early-stage excitement. Business school educators can warn budding entrepreneurs about the dangers of overpromising and underdelivering. And entrepreneurs must be clear about the implications of the slippery slope of deception for themselves and others to make sure their efforts create rather than destroy value for society.

--- Document: HBS_article9.txt ---

The CEO of e.l.f. Beauty on Maintaining a Startup Culture While Scaling
by Tarang Amin
Summary. Even as it has become a major player in the beauty industry, e.l.f. continues to operate like a startup, driven by its vision, mission, and values, acting as one nonhierarchical, passionate, high-performance team, and constantly exploring how to move further and faster than the competition.
In 2024 e.l.f. Beauty became the company with the top-selling mass cosmetics brand in the United States, as measured by unit sales, surpassing all its legacy competitors. It was a big milestone, and in one of my weekly notes to our 500 team members, I congratulated everyone on reaching it. But we didn’t pause for a big celebration. Instead we immediately asked ourselves, How quickly can we get from number two to number one in dollar sales, as well?
That ambition, focus, and speed has been a part of e.l.f.’s culture since its founding, two decades ago. Even as we’ve become a major player in the beauty industry, we’ve continued to operate like a startup. We’re driven by a clear vision, mission, and values. We act as one nonhierarchical, passionate, high-performance team. We live as one team with one dream. And we’re constantly exploring how to improve and grow.
This commitment to keeping our small, scrappy mentality as we scale up has hastened our success. It’s why we’ve posted 22 consecutive quarters of net sales and market share growth and why our net sales exceeded $1 billion in fiscal 2024.
There’s no question in my mind that organizations of all kinds can learn from our approach. Size does not have to dictate speed. Big companies can move faster than they do. And industry leaders can meaningfully innovate. Consider our story.
Beginnings
The founders of e.l.f. were a father and son, Alan and Joey Shamah, who were focused first and foremost on affordability. Alan had been in the private-label apparel business but wanted to start a new venture with his son upon Joey’s college graduation. They knew nothing about cosmetics but couldn’t understand why the price points in the category were so high and thus considered it ripe for disruption. Their crazy idea was to sell products for eyes, lips, and face (e.l.f.) for $1 each, and they worked backward to figure out how to generate healthy margins by manufacturing for a third to half of that cost.
The resulting cosmetics were not just inexpensive but also of good quality. Dollar General declined to carry the products, saying no one would buy makeup that cheap. But when the Shamahs sent one of their eyeliners to an editor at Glamour, she was ready to give it a rave review. So in 2004 they built a website and started selling directly to customers. The brand soon went viral, and by 2014 the company had 120 employees, national distribution at Target, and $100 million in net sales.
That’s when the private equity group TPG Growth acquired a large stake in e.l.f., and I took over as CEO. My background is a combination of entrepreneurship—through the motels business my family started with all their savings after they immigrated to the United States from East Africa—and experience in the consumer packaged goods industry at Procter & Gamble and Clorox.
When I was 14, my family bought our first motel, a distressed one in Alexandria, Virginia, that we felt we could turn around. Everything I know about the fundamentals of business—from cash flow to economic profit to how you treat people—came from helping my dad with our motels. I was president of my high school class, but I went to only one football game (homecoming senior year) because most Friday nights I was working: making beds, engaging customers, taking care of whatever needed to be done.
After earning undergraduate and business degrees from Duke University, I began my career at P&G on the team that relaunched Pantene hair care, helping grow its revenues from $50 million to $2 billion. I went on to manage brands for both P&G and Clorox in categories ranging from home care, laundry, and paper goods to food and pet care. That was like a finishing school after my early education with my parents and my MBA. But I missed the autonomy and the pace of a smaller business, where everyone’s work has an impact on performance and results.
I realized that my sweet spot might be fast-growth mid-market companies, so 14 years ago I agreed to take the helm of another TPG Growth acquisition, Schiff Nutrition, a vitamins and supplements company. Over the next two years the team and I increased enterprise value from $190 million to $1.5 billion and then sold the business to Reckitt Benckiser. At that point it was time to find another company still in startup mode that could be scaled up without sacrificing its special sauce.
By the time TPG and I started considering e.l.f., it had already broken through. In a highly fragmented sector (there are more than 1,900 cosmetics and skin care brands in the United States alone) it was one of only 26 that had hit $100 million in retail sales. But what sold me on the company was my diligence call to Target. The head merchant for beauty told me that she loved e.l.f. not only because it had brought a younger, more diverse cohort of makeup enthusiasts into Target’s stores but also because it was so good at launching new products that it had already vetted with its online followers (proactively refreshing 20% of its assortment each year). She added that it was her most productive brand, not just on a unit basis but on a dollar-per-foot basis—impressive when it was still selling at bargain prices. We knew the company was ready to move to the next level.
The e.l.f. Ethos
The vision of e.l.f. is to create a different kind of beauty company by building brands that disrupt norms, shape culture, and connect communities through positivity, inclusivity, and accessibility. The Shamahs wanted to delight consumers by investing more in products than in marketing; to find unique strengths, such as being digitally native; to do the right thing; and to execute with speed. When I joined as CEO, I knew that continuity on all those points was critical. They were the hallmarks of a successful entrepreneurial culture that I and the rest of the management team needed to support.
However, we quickly saw ways to take e.l.f. to a wider audience. For example, at the time, the average price of one of our products was about $2. But why couldn’t we build out our R&D capabilities and supply chain to engineer products of even better quality at prices that were still relatively low compared with those of competitors?
What followed was a wave of innovation designed to better serve our customers. For instance, when we saw a prestige brand selling a putty primer for $54 or a light-filtering foundation for $49, we set out to make similar versions that now retail for $10 and $14.
People who see value in buying expensive cosmetics still do so. But the millions who don’t, or who can’t afford to but still want to look good or treat themselves, can turn to e.l.f. Initially our gross margins were thin by industry standards, but through this focus on innovation, we’ve more than doubled them.
What’s more, our community of e.l.f. consumers both points the way to new offerings and builds our brand through word of mouth. Here’s a recent example: One prestige lip oil retails for $40. Our community asked us to provide a more affordable alternative. So we studied the oil (not analyzing and copying its formula but creating our own, with the same glossy effect but more hydration), added a larger applicator, and sold it for $8. We didn’t have to advertise it anywhere. Almost immediately after launch, TikTok was full of videos in which people favorably compared our lip oil with the prestige one and said they preferred ours.
A photo of three bottles and one tube of e.l.f. Beauty products against a bright pink background.
e.l.f. products from left to right: Bronzing Drops, Power Grip Primer, Halo Glow Liquid Filter, Glow Reviver Lip OilKelsey McClellan
Every day we listen to what our community wants and then endeavor to bring it to the members at what we call “e.l.f. speed”: considering new ideas, making decisions quickly, pivoting when necessary, and going all out when we think it’s important to make something happen. In December 2023 our chief marketing officer and I did a TikTok Live, and the chat lit up with questions about when we could release a value version of some popular prestige bronzing drops. I knew we had such a product in our pipeline, which typically stretches about three years, so I called our head of innovation to ask where in the calendar it stood. She said it would be ready in 18 months. I asked if her team could do it faster. We released it six months later.
Sometimes our decisions are challenging. For example, by 2018 the company had opened 27 e.l.f. branded stores. But we soon realized that they were all located in malls that probably wouldn’t see a better day. Although they all had long-term leases, we knew that the right decision for the health of the business was to shutter them so that we could invest further in digital and external retail.
Like any startup, we make forward motion a priority. We don’t overanalyze every aspect of a move before making it. We discuss and debate ideas but then we decide and commit to a certain product or path, knowing that if we get new or better information, we can always make corrective decisions later. Our launch plan for Europe is a good example: We recently moved Germany ahead of other countries on the basis of new data about various markets. A less nimble company would have balked at changing a sequence that had been established for several years. We did it on the fly.
Being clear about our vision, mission, and values also allows us to push decision-making down into the organization. The most complex and hardest decisions rise to the executive level, but all our team members know that if they can answer yes to the questions “Will this delight our community? Does this build or leverage our unique strengths? Is this doing the right thing? Is this helping us execute better and faster? Is this making us more innovative, inclusive, and accessible?” they should feel empowered to approve or press on with that work.
One Passionate, High-Performance Team
People may join a startup because they are inspired by its mission, vision, and values, but they stay and give you their best only when they also have a voice and an ownership stake in the venture.
I learned that from my parents. They couldn’t afford to pay their motel employees the highest hourly wages or salaries, but as they expanded into multiple locations, they created paths for people to work their way up to the managerial level, gave them the training and the autonomy to run those motels, and if they hit certain targets, financed them in purchasing their own properties.
At P&G and Clorox, brand managers had a lot of control over their respective lines of business, but pay and equity stakes accrued to only the most senior levels. The attitude was: “It’s our job to make those people a lot of money so that one day we’ll reach those levels and others will make us a lot of money.”
I always felt that was backward. My preferred incentive system is one that makes everyone an owner as soon as possible. When I moved into the chief executive role at Schiff, I insisted that TPG give me stock awards and options based on performance incentives to free up equity for our employees. That approach paid off: The team boosted the company’s value more than sixfold before its sale to Reckitt Benckiser.
So when we acquired e.l.f., there was no question about whether we would give shares to everyone. And even after our 2016 public offering, we continue to increase those stakes. Each team member is awarded stock annually—which, I believe, makes us unique among the approximately 270 publicly traded consumer companies. Annual grants start at $15,000 for the most junior employees. Because e.l.f.’s market value has risen by a factor of 10 over the past five years, that has meant significant wealth creation for the team.
Just as important as incentivizing commitment is removing disincentives for collaboration, so all bonuses are tied to enterprisewide—not individual or team—performance. Our operations team members aren’t trying to hit their own goal while their colleagues in sales and marketing aim for another. We’re all in it together, and for the past five years the result of such unity has been a payout of twice the bonus target across the board.
We emphasize the “one team” idea in our communications and language, too. From the earliest days of my tenure, when we were transforming our supply chain operation, I made it clear that our production teams in China were just as critical to our success as the C-suite, R&D, technology, and retail teams at headquarters. The same is now true for our Europe-based colleagues. Diversity of all kinds is prized at e.l.f., and we are proud to have a multicultural, multigenerational team from the most junior members to the boardroom.
The executive team and I welcome input from all corners. The company’s every-other-week product review is open to anyone at e.l.f. for comments in the group chat; it regularly attracts more than 200 people from all levels and functions, who freely share their opinions. During the Covid-19 lockdowns, I started a weekly employee email, and I’ve continued it (it’s into week 236 at the time of this writing), not just to share my views with the team but also because it’s an opening for our people to write back to me. Each week I get one or two dozen responses, always from different e.l.f.z (as we affectionately call our team members) about their lives and work and ideas for the company.
The larger an organization gets, the harder it is to truly know everyone in it the way the leader of a startup would. But I try hard to do so. I schedule major decision meetings in chunks, whether I’m gathering my executive team or doing product or sales and operations reviews. That way I’m able to keep large swaths of time open to think and connect directly with team members, by walking the halls of our headquarters; regularly traveling to New York, Shanghai, and London; and doing one-on-ones not just with my direct reports but also with associate directors and VPs. My wife and I regularly host what are known as Afternoons with the Amins—we fly a group of team members from different geographies and business areas, along with their significant others, to spend some time with us at our home.
We encourage all our people to get to know one another on a personal level and to engage in ways that will help the team succeed. Members of the executive team conduct orientations for new hires, introducing them to the e.l.f. way. Everyone takes a Myers-Briggs Type Indicator test, which provides us with a shorthand for understanding and discussing our own work preferences and those of our colleagues. We also conduct training on how to give effective real-time feedback and manage healthy conflict.
E l f Beauty Facts and Financials. Founded: 2004. Headquarters: Oakland, California. Number of employees: 500. Area chart measures e l f’s revenue and net income from 2020 to 2024. Revenue increased from 283 million dollars to 1.02 billion dollars, while net income increased from 32 million dollars to 184 million dollars.
As a result, every day, across the company, we’re having frank and productive conversations about how to individually and collectively improve, rather than waiting for an annual review cycle to talk about and implement those changes. We routinely praise one another for good work and note what we admire about one another. But we’re also comfortable pointing out when we believe that certain behaviors are limiting someone’s effectiveness. And if people are not willing to work on themselves, or are simply not working out, we don’t waste time putting performance-improvement plans in place. Instead we respectfully discuss the disconnect and help them find a better fit outside e.l.f.
Fostering the kind of passionate relationships that permit constant, constructive feedback in all directions frees up managers to lead their teams. They have more time to spend with reports discussing how to build and leverage their strengths and what opportunities at e.l.f. they might want to tackle next.
The Future
One of my top priorities since I took the helm at e.l.f. Beauty has been to maintain the close-knit, mission-driven, values-led, committed, and collaborative culture that the Shamahs created while also transforming the company into a beauty-industry powerhouse. That takes intentionality and focus, and we actually measure our success not in our revenues or share price growth but in employee-engagement results.
More than 90% of our team members tell us that they are very or extremely engaged, and 98% of them say that they would recommend e.l.f. as an employer. In 2023 we were able to add more than 30 people to our workforce, acquire the skin care brand Naturium, and build out our London team for European expansion—all without seeing those employee-engagement scores change in the slightest. If we can continue to get our culture right, other achievements are sure to follow.
Our company mantra is “Anything is e.l.f.ing possible,” and our accomplishments are driven by our people and our unique culture. As we continue to take our business global, we will stay rooted as one team, one dream.

--- Document: HBS_journal1.txt ---

Inside One Startup's Journey to Break Down Hiring (and Funding) Barriers
In a case study, Paul Gompers explores the challenges a social justice startup encounters in helping the formerly incarcerated, as well as lessons for other entrepreneurs.
Featuring Paul A. Gompers. By Avery Forman on November 12, 2024.
Launching a social justice startup takes more than a moving story. Ask Harley Blakeman, the 32-year-old founder of Honest Jobs.
He has perfected his elevator pitch, but that doesn’t mean launching his business has been easy. A once-homeless teenager from Florida, Blakeman turned to selling drugs—a lucrative gig that taught him a lot about business but ultimately landed him in prison.
Once he’d served his 14 months, Blakeman sought to build a career and turn his life around. But when his criminal record kept him from getting a job, he started wondering: How can formerly incarcerated people truly reintegrate into society if few firms will hire them? And, how can society—especially at a time of rising prices and low unemployment—afford to exclude the roughly one in three working Americans with criminal records from the economy? The roadblocks Blakeman encountered in finding a job would end up providing the inspiration for his next business opportunity: a tech business that put “justice-involved” individuals to work.
"Tech startups are so concentrated in a small number of places with a small number of types of people, so there’s innovation that doesn’t happen."
Yet as a recent Harvard Business School case study details, big-name investors say they want to take bets on social justice startups like Blakeman’s, but few actually take the plunge—especially if the entrepreneurs at their helm don’t come from the same polished backgrounds and high-status schools as all the well-known venture capitalists working on the two coasts. Paul Gompers, the Eugene Holman Professor of Business Administration at HBS, met Blakeman through a former student as he created a course called “Entrepreneurship Outside the Valley” to explore how people can overcome entrepreneurial obstacles and leverage their backgrounds to build their businesses and generate funding.
“Harley’s business is one that really no one else would have started because it’s his past experience that created this. Tech startups are so concentrated in a small number of places with a small number of types of people, so there’s innovation that doesn’t happen,” says Gompers. “This is true [for] women, its true for underrepresented minorities, and it’s true for the formerly incarcerated as well.”
Gompers says the case poses important questions for coastal investors to wrestle with as they champion diversity, equity, and inclusion goals and seek to make an impact beyond the balance sheet. He encourages investors to ask: “How do we make startups more accessible, both geographically and among different groups? How do we think about creating a playing field where people who don’t grow up with a silver spoon in their mouths have an opportunity to do something like Harley’s doing?”
A prison conviction leads to multiple employment rejections
After losing his father at age 15, Blakeman fell into hard drug use. After he was incarcerated in a Georgia prison and newly sober, Blakeman faced a harsh reality.
Returning to Florida after serving his time would likely land him back in jail. Rekindled relationships with an aunt and grandmother in Ohio inspired him to turn his life around and move to the Midwest after his release instead. He spent his remaining time behind bars working as a janitor, reading business books, and obtaining his high school equivalency diploma.
Blakeman went on to earn a business degree at Ohio State University, graduating with honors. However, he was rejected for the more than 80 positions he interviewed for after background checks uncovered his criminal record. He was caught in a web of rules that differ across states and industries that exclude formerly incarcerated individuals from holding jobs.
In an interview with Working Knowledge, Blakeman recalls: “I’m a white male, and finding a job was a huge pain point for me. I can’t imagine the challenges people of color, low-income, and those with lack of access to education and transportation face after prison.”
The manufacturer Owens Corning finally gave him a chance. At the same time, he set out to solve the problem his experience revealed. Blakeman spent weekends building an online community for incarcerated people and wrote a book, Grit: How to Get a Job and Build a Career with a Criminal Record.
Launching a tech startup to help the formerly incarcerated
Blakeman started Honest Jobs in 2020, personally helping 30 formerly incarcerated people rebuild skills and find jobs while working to identify the difficulties of job seekers and employers. As remote work surged during the COVID-19 pandemic, unemployment hovered below 4 percent, and many employers struggled to fill openings.
"Harley has to build a team, but doesn’t have all the skills necessary to do it."
For the formerly incarcerated, the job market was much different, with unemployment at 27 percent unemployment and recidivism at almost 77 percent in 2022. Some $88 billion was spent per year to run the sprawling prison system in the United States, with the New York University Center for Justice estimating some $132 billion in annual household income lost for people convicted of felonies.
Honest Jobs experienced hiring and fundraising challenges early on. Blakeman struck out with a business partner he ultimately bought out, plus he hired and then laid off senior people in business development and marketing. Gompers reflected that it can be hard for founders to translate their passion and vision to their hires, saying: “Harley has to build a team, but doesn’t have all the skills necessary to do it.”
The hustle to woo investors
For example, Blakeman needed to learn how to talk to potential investors.
“When I was starting the business, it wasn’t in my vocabulary to raise money,” says Blakeman. “And that speaks to part of the problem. If you grow up in a place that’s not San Francisco or New York, you maybe don’t know a single person who knows that language. I was limited by what my mind could think to Google.”
He learned quickly to orient his business within the broader needs of the economy, linking his pitch to the job market and a criminal justice system that’s bloated and costly to taxpayers.
By 2022, Blakeman’s team developed ConflixAI, using artificial intelligence to review the skills and qualifications of job seekers and suggest matches with employers based on the nature of the crime, the amount of time since the conviction, and the nature of the job. For instance, “a low rating might be displayed for an individual convicted of credit card theft who was considering applying for a financial services customer support role,” Blakeman says.
A pitch to the right person at the right time at a bar led to a $100,000 angel investment. Diversifying his business, Blakeman started to work with prisons to put his search tools into the hands of inmates before their release. Honest Jobs offered several price points, ultimately building to 1,500 employers, 146,000 job seekers, and $3 million in investments from Midwest- and Rocky Mountain-based venture capital firms.
Blakeman’s product should have a natural path to expansion by helping companies meet diversity, equity, and inclusion goals and helping investors achieve the “social” prong of their environmental, social, and governance aspirations. But Honest Jobs still struggles to attract funding from firms beyond the Midwest and Rocky Mountain regions.
“I was making it to the final round of discussions with a lot of well-known venture capital firms, but then none of them would take the lead and commit,” he says. “I don’t know if I need their funding to be successful, but I understand the influence they have on startups and their ability to raise future financing.”
Eight tips to democratize opportunity
Blakeman says his experience has taught him plenty about overcoming obstacles to attract investors and build a successful business, all without some of the advantages of other entrepreneurs. He and Gompers offer this advice to “democratize opportunity” for startups.
Don’t ask these questions of investors, Gompers says: “Did you go to the same school? Did you work at the same firms? Do you know the same people?” These questions tend to narrow the worldview of investment opportunities to people who look like the investor.
Make the pitch personal. “Share your story. Be vocal on social media. Intentionally say, ‘Here’s my experience—being a homeless teenager, going to prison,’ instead of pitching them on my company,” says Blakeman.
Once you’ve told your story, connect the dots to the social problem that needs to be fixed. “This is a tragedy that affects many more people than me,” Blakeman says. “People have an idea of what this looks like but they’re wrong. So really cracking that narrative.”
Stretch the timeline for success. Many venture capital models plan on a five- to seven-year timeline to succeed or fail. But purpose-built companies might need longer. “You want a founder who will fight and die for the company,” says Blakeman. “If a startup takes 10 years to get to $100 million, I’d argue that’s still a good outcome.”
Stay close to your mission. “My confidence with investors goes up every time I talk to one of our users whose life we changed,” says Blakeman. “I forget when I’m sitting on Zoom calls that people’s lives are changing. That’s not reflected in our revenue yet.”
Leverage the organization’s impact to attract talent. Blakeman says, “Expectations of wealth can be balanced with expectations of this new generation of employees, who believe it’s almost cooler to be able to say, ‘Look at the people I helped or the impact I have had,’ instead of: ‘Look at my Ferrari in my four-car garage.’”
Incentives matter in inspiring employees to embrace the mission and work hard. “We want to make sure the incentives are aligned. Private markets do a much better job than the government in solving these kinds of really important societal problems. Identify the metrics that are a measure of success and compensate on those,” says Gompers.
Keep an open mind when building a team. “For someone like me, we need to pull in people with complementary skills who know something we don’t know,” Blakeman says. “That can be hard. People who come from nothing tend to have a little bit of a protective nature because they don’t live in a world of surplus or opportunity everywhere. So when they do finally get an opportunity, they’re a little worried to let someone from New York or Boston or San Francisco come into their executive team.” However, he says, that person’s experience and expertise may be just what a company needs to succeed, so it’s important to keep an open mind.

--- Document: HBS_journal2.txt ---

The following is a lightly edited excerpt from the book The Experimentation Machine: Finding Product-Market Fit in the Age of AI, written by Jeffrey Bussgang.
There’s a running joke in Startupland that artificial intelligence (AI) is going to replace all humans inside a business: the founders, product managers, salespeople, engineers, and certainly the lawyers. While some tasks will be automated, I don’t expect fully autonomous startups anytime soon. But massive changes are happening, and some folks will be left behind. AI may not replace the startup founder, but startup founders who use AI are going to replace founders who don’t.
When ChatGPT debuted in late 2022, I knew we had reached a point of no return.
Generative AI—powered by large language models (LLMs) to create strikingly creative and human content in text, code, and visuals—is an incredible example of science fiction becoming science fact. From the consumer’s perspective, computers suddenly became capable of interacting in ways so humanlike that the difference between human and machine was imperceptible. They could tell you bedtime stories, generate cover letters, code up a website, and even paint you a Monet. The famous Turing test—a capabilities threshold to ascertain if machines could pass as human—was shattered.
Founders who use AI will replace founders who don’t.
Gen AI’s rate of adoption is nearly as staggering as its creative output. It took the world wide web seven years to reach 100 million users. ChatGPT reached that milestone in just two months. As of this writing, ChatGPT (still the largest AI platform) has over 300 million weekly active users in just two years since its launch, and it continues to grow by double digits every quarter. For businesses, generative AI represents the largest boost in productivity and opportunity since the Internet. I have become fascinated with how to apply this radical new technology in startups. AI has become a focal point in my Harvard Business School (HBS) MBA course, Launching Tech Ventures.
We’ve also gone all in on AI at Flybridge, rewriting our investment thesis to exclusively focus on “AI-forward” startups across industries. In particular, I am interested in how startup founders and their teams can use AI to accelerate the search for product market fit, and later, to scale. Like a catalyst in a chemical reaction, AI tools have the power to turbocharge startups through the learning and growth curves, creating bigger and better outcomes, faster than we ever thought possible. Founders who use AI will replace founders who don’t.
But ChatGPT and other AI tools are just that—tools in the startup toolbox. Founders still need to answer the same fundamental questions they always have:
Who is my customer?
What problem can I help them solve?
How do I make money and build a sustainable, profitable business?
To answer these questions, I have long advocated for a scientific approach to building startups. Founders should create hypotheses, run experiments, and implement the results. That’s why my preferred mental model for startups is the Experimentation Machine.
An operating model for startups
A startup founder’s job is to build an experiment-driven organization, i.e., an Experimentation Machine.
The goal is to test and probe for answers to the most fundamental questions of any business:
Who is my ideal customer?
What do they want and need?
How do I deliver it to them?
How do I find more ideal customers?
How do I make money and build a sustainable business?
The goal as an early-stage founder is to maximize your learning by testing assumptions and refining your ideas. The key is to do this quickly and successfully enough to find product-market fit before you run out of money. AI is the ultimate experiment accelerator for startups.
Building an Experimentation Machine requires a basic understanding of the scientific method. It starts with asking a question or identifying a problem: Why is it so hard to get a haircut? Next is research: How are things done today? What are the alternatives and workarounds to this problem? What do people actually want?
Founders need to make hypotheses for every part of their business: customer value proposition, go-to-market, technology infrastructure, and monetization plan.
After conducting deep customer discovery—the process of thoroughly researching potential customers’ needs and problems—the founding team creates a hypothesis or an educated guess. Founders need to make hypotheses for every part of their business: customer value proposition, go-to-market, technology infrastructure, and monetization plan. A hypothesis must be falsifiable. Can you definitively prove it to be correct or incorrect?
Then you identify the most important hypothesis and design an experiment to test it. The strategy of test selection boils down to three essential questions:
Which business model component is most controversial, and what is the essential hypothesis for that component?
What is the key milestone I need to achieve that will lead to my next valuation inflection point, helping unlock more capital from investors?
Where does the greatest risk exist in my business model, and what does the flow of dependencies look like?
The answers depend on the startup and their stage of growth. However, when starting from scratch or running the Experimentation Machine framework for the first time, startups should run tests in the following sequence:
Customer Value Proposition experiments
Who are your ideal customers, what do they want, and how does the startup deliver? The primary business function under scrutiny is the product.
How to use AI to run CVP experiments:
Ask AI to simulate the role of target customers or expert stakeholders.
Simulate customer conversations to learn about the most important features in a minimum viable product (MVP).
Use AI coding tools to create an MVP in 1/10th the time.
Go-to-market experiments
What is the ideal sales model? What are the most efficient customer acquisition channels? What is your best growth flywheel? Product, sales, and growth are the key business functions to test in this stage.
How to use AI to run go-to-market experiments:
Develop 10 times more marketing content to test across channels.
Create an AI-powered, interactive customer persona to test new messaging and positioning concepts.
Personalize outreach at scale.
Business model/profit formula experiments
How do you monetize and price? How do you improve your margins? Are you maximizing your potential valuation? Marketing, customer success, and business development now enter the picture.
How to use AI to run business model experiments:
Simulate customer surveys to evaluate pricing decisions
Analyze customer feedback to identify best-fit customer segments
This sequence answers the most fundamental questions about your startup in the order needed to build a functioning business. Your monetization strategy does not matter if you can’t attract customers, and your go-to-market strategy is useless without having a strong customer value proposition.
A startup founder’s job is that of Chief Experimentation Officer. You must guide your team to adopt the scientific method and run the Experimentation Machine operating model diligently. With a bit of luck and a lot of hard work, you may pave a highway that leads your startup to scale and financial exit.

--- Document: HBS_journal3.txt ---

Why Great Ideas Get Stuck in Universities
Academic institutions incubate novel ideas and are important innovation partners for companies, but getting products out of universities and onto the market can be challenging.
By Ben Rand on July 26, 2024
Entrepreneurs must overcome many barriers to get discoveries to market, but academic researchers face an additional one they might not realize: themselves.
Academics tend to develop a myopic focus on the unique expertise they spend their lives developing, but that narrow scope can become a commercial hindrance. A recent study of more than 500 biomedical startups suggests that ventures rooted in the core research of their founders have a more challenging time reaching key measures of success, such as raising capital or attracting a buyer.
You decide to start a company, and while figuring it all out, you discover that it’s not the right technology for the problem.
Academic researchers are “almost too married to their ideas and technologies, but I don’t blame them,” says Maria Roche, assistant professor in the Strategy Unit at Harvard Business School, and one of the study’s authors. “You’ve been working on this research your whole life and are convinced that it’s awesome. Then you decide to start a company, and while figuring it all out, you discover that it’s not the right technology for the problem. And then pivoting gets hard because that’s all you’ve known.”
The study provides valuable insights for founders and universities as they invest more into the higher-risk, early-stage research that often results in meaningful innovation. Companies have long teamed with academia, but such partnerships might become more important to industries like biotechnology, which have been affected by interest rate-related volatility in venture capital funding and mergers and acquisitions activity.
Roche conducted the analysis with Justine Boudou, a doctoral student at HBS.
Academic chops don’t translate to success
The 510 startups in the study, concentrated primarily in California, Massachusetts, Pennsylvania, North Carolina, Maryland, and Michigan, were all established between 2005 and 2015 to allow time for the researchers to study how the firms fared in getting to market.
The researchers focused explicitly on biomedical ventures because they typically seek to grow through acquisition. Each startup was required to have at least one academic founder and one existing patent, which lowered the number of companies in the study to a total of 308, involving more than 500 scholars.
Roche and Boudou measured how closely the scope of the startups’ patents reflected their founders’ research. Their surprising finding: Firms that built their businesses around the core research interests of their founders struggled the most.
Specifically, Roche and Boudou found that for every 10 percentage points those two factors—patents and founder research—were more aligned, startups were:
4.2 percent less likely to land $10 million or more in investment capital within five years. This represents a significant reduction given that the average likelihood of raising this amount is 25 percent.
2.5 percent less likely to find an acquisition partner. This represents a notable decrease considering the average likelihood of finding an acquisition partner is 8 percent.
No more or less likely to go through an IPO.
Landing funding and finding a buyer are considered key milestones of entrepreneurial success, making those metrics particularly telling, the researchers say.
Too narrow a focus?
Roche and Boudou considered several explanations for their findings: whether the technology driving the startup was too new or not good enough, and whether the founders took too central a role in controlling or managing the company.
Ultimately, they ruled out these factors for another, more counterintuitive, conclusion: An overreliance on founders’ specialized knowledge narrows startups’ options as they seek the right paths to commercialize their work.
It’s not like they are doing worse science, have worse patents, or are just not ready and putting things out too soon.
Roche says that specialization can give rise to standalone products that are too narrow to appeal to potential acquirers or too difficult for venture capitalists to evaluate against other potential investments.
But it’s not the quality of the knowledge that’s at issue, Roche says. The startups’ focus “makes it difficult for them to be integrated once they are acquired,” Roche says. “So they are not the most attractive targets—let’s put it that way. But it’s not like they are doing worse science, have worse patents, or are just not ready and putting things out too soon.”
The researchers add that outliers—specialized startups that found further success in the market—are rare, and mainly involve companies purchased for their intellectual property.
Lessons for universities
The study’s findings are significant as university research expenditures climb to record levels, reaching more than $91 billion in 2022, according to the Association of University Technology Managers. Universities created over 1,100 startups in the same year, an 8 percent increase over 2021.
If they’re being nudged to do more commercial work, you might not notice the consequences in the next five to 10 years
In attempting to fill the commercialization gap left by companies, “universities will have to be very careful that they don’t shift too far into doing the commercial work,” Roche says. “Because what academia has afforded for so many decades is the freedom to do crazy stuff, curiosity-driven research, research that might not make sense to the layperson or at first glance.”
She adds an additional note of caution: “If they’re being nudged to do more commercial work, you might not notice the consequences in the next five to 10 years, but maybe in 20 or 30 years. And we’re already seeing a decline in breakthrough science.”
